Here we go.
Good afternoon. Afternoon. Hey, hey. Hello. Hello.
This is,
well, thanks, uh, for joining us this afternoon.
Um, Jan, Megan, um,
and team, um, we've got three hours with you, uh, afternoon,
and we've got a structured agenda.
We will try and, um, work to through the afternoon,
but we're not terribly, uh, strict on these things here.
So if there's some ebb
and flow, that'll be, um, that'll be fine.
If you're able to work with that, give you the opportunity
to have some opening remarks.
And then, um, we will into question with you.
Perfect. Thank you.
Afternoon, everyone. Chair, uh, committee members.
Thank you for the opportunity to come
and talk with you today.
Um, I, my name's Jane Dawson.
I'm the chair of a CC, and next to me is Megan Lane,
and we're also joined by some of our executive team.
After my opening remarks, Megan will add some comments
and introduce the members of the executive team.
Uh, then obviously we're available for committee questions.
A CC continues to support injured New Zealanders.
It's been a treasured part of New Zealand society
for over 50 years,
delivering no fault insurance for personal injury.
We know New Zealanders value the scheme,
and we are very aware of our role as stewards of the scheme
to make sure it's available for current
and future generations.
For the last decade, the size of the scheme has continued
to grow each year in volume of claims and in cost to support
and rehabilitate injured people.
In 2025, A CC received more than 2 million claims,
71,000 more than the year before.
We accepted 99% of these claims.
Of the new claims, 55% were accepted within a minute,
and 80% were accepted within 24 hours.
More complicated claims such as treatment injuries,
sensitive claims, and work-related Mental injuries take
longer to assess,
and on average, it took 57 days
to assure a cover decision on these cohort,
we spent over 8.1 billion in medical treatment,
rehabilitation support,
and weekly compensation, an increase
of 1 billion over the previous year.
The overall deficit of the scheme
for the year was 1.5 billion,
significantly better than the 2024 deficit
of 7.2 billion.
This was primarily due
to the reduction in the outstanding claims liability,
which is the future cost of known claims.
A CC managers one of New Zealand's biggest investment funds
of 54 billion,
and the investment team performed very well with returns
above the benchmark.
Again, the investment funders decide
to ensure there are sufficient reserves
to cover the lifetime cost of injuries
that have already occurred.
This reflects the principle of intergenerational equity.
However, the total account reserves with 13.8 billion
negative as asset during 2025.
Accs experienced a year of internal and external challenges.
The scheme is under pressure
with more people spending more time away from work
after injury, taking more time
to recover while the cost paid for treatment
and rehabilitation continues to rise.
The two, two key drivers
of the increase in outstanding claims liability
are the volume and costs claims
and the rehabilitation performance of returning people
to work or independence.
Claims costs grew with inflation
and wage growth for health services,
and the gap between our funding for levies
and appropriations and the new year claims costs
stubbornly remains deterioration
and rehabilitation performance is an ongoing challenge.
Continuing the decade long trend,
despite the hard work about people and the providers.
Accs injury prevention activities have also not
yet made a significant impact on the reduction of injuries,
but we are taking action to tackle the challenges.
We are determined to be a high performing organization
with a safe, positive,
and inclusive culture, focusing on our core purpose
of supporting people to recover from their injuries.
There have been three reviews conducted
over the past 12 months.
The board commissioned an external review of accs culture.
The minister for a CC commissioned a review
of accs case management practices,
and Treasury commissioned a review of
accs investment function.
The board and executive welcomed the guidance
provided by the reviews.
We've committed to acting on the recommendations from each
of them, and work has commenced.
A CC has developed a turnaround plan,
which includes the recommendations
that is aimed at improving social rehabilitation decision
making, supporting clients to return to work
or independence, working differently with providers
and resetting a C C's strategic direction priorities.
We recognize we can improve our performance
and have started work on initiatives
and claims management, our operational decision making,
how we engage with providers
and our cultural reset, a new strategy
to strengthen our core
and direct our efforts will be shared
with our people this month.
We are pleased that there have been promising signs in our
rehabilitation performance as a result
of the changes in our case management practices.
The return to work and independence rates are improving,
and the growth rate in the long term claims pool has reduced
expenditure across key areas of weekly compensation.
Social rehabilitation
and conflict of surgery is forecast
to be lower than our budget, reflecting
performance improvements
and our deliberate focus on the management of costs.
I want to thank our frontline staff in particular
for the huge effort to achieve these performance results.
But while we recognize our part in ensuring the scheme is
sustainable, we need others
to consider the impact they're having on the scheme's future
given over the next 12 months.
We'll work with clients, employers,
and providers to focus on what they can do
to prevent injuries, help rehabilitation outcomes,
and respect the scheme's, purpose
and boundaries, people accessing more treatment services
and financial support that are needed, places
pressure on providing services to those
who genuinely need it,
and on the ability for the scheme to continue
for future claimants.
The costs of a CC are paid by everyone,
and we all have a part to play in protecting it
for future generations.
I'll now hand over to Megan for her comments.
Thanks, Jan. Good afternoon, chair and committee members.
Um, I'd like to quickly introduce the members of, uh,
my executive team that are here with us today.
So next to me is Michael Frampton, our DCE service delivery.
And then behind me we've got Andy Milan,
who's in the role at the moment
of executive lead scheme sustainability
until later this month.
Next to him is David Iversson, our Chief Investment Officer.
Then we've got Stuart Rovy, our, uh,
DC corporate and finance.
And then got Renee Graham, who's acting in the role
of DCE strategy, um, engagement and conviction.
Um, and we look forward to discussing
and responding to your questions around
accs performance over the last 12 months.
I'd just like to highlight a few, um, specific examples
of achievements over the last 12 months to support
Jan's opening remarks.
Um, we will talk more about the turnaround in return to work
and rehabilitation.
I wanna just touch on a couple
of the things we've done to get there.
So last year we focus, we talked about the need
to invest in more one-to-one case management.
I'm pleased to say that we did invest the 250 additional
roles to set up a team to give one-to-one case management,
to, um, all of those clients
who had been receiving weekly compensation for over a year.
We're also providing that one to one-to-one support to all
of our new weekly compensation clients,
to really keep them connected to work, to work
with them early in their recovery journey.
Um, we've also invested in the capability of our team.
We've got a lot of new case managers at a CC.
So in addition to expanding our capacity,
we're also focused on uplifting the capability,
empowering our frontline teams to be able
to make decisions closer to clients.
And I'm sure Michael can touch more on some of the training
and support we're developing there.
Um, so particularly so that we get consistent,
appropriate decisions that are in line with our legislation,
in particular with some of the supports that we provide.
As Jan said, we're also working in new
and different ways with our important partners,
the health providers, the 30,000
or so providers that,
that deliver the rehabilitation and treatment.
Um, we know that those providers,
because they tell us, want more information to,
to enable them to play their part in rehabilitation.
So an example of
what we've done there is we've developed new dashboards
and tools that we're sharing with surgeons
and gps to give them information
to help them monitor the return to work of their patients
who are also our clients.
Um, and it also shows how they're doing against their peers
so that they can learn and improve as well.
We're using technology, um, to improve our,
both our effectiveness of decision making
and our efficiency of that.
Um, like most organizations, we are looking at how we can
leverage AI to help us in that.
We are using AI in our call center
to quickly identify why a client might be calling
and direct them straight to the area
that can help them rather than handing them around.
Um, we're also piloting AI in our frontline teams
to summarize call notes for clients so
that the case manager can move quickly to the next steps.
We're trialing the use of AI to identify
where a client might might need additional support from us
or a further review by a staff member.
And generally, you know,
as a big transactional organization,
we do see if carefully thought through, um, a number
of opportunities where we can use AI to free our people up
to make the right decisions faster
and get that support to people who need it.
We're also focused, um, as good stewards
of the scheme on ensuring that levy payers
and taxpayers money is used appropriately.
As Jan said, we get over 2 million new claims every year,
and in a scheme of our size, there is always the risk
of people taking advantage of abuse of the scheme.
Um, and we have an obligation to identify
and address any instances of fraud, waste abuse.
Um, so we've strengthened
and renamed, um, our fraud prevention
and investigation team.
We've increased the team by 26.
We're also working more closely
with inland revenue on good information sharing,
so we can pick up anomalies early
before they become a financial burden, both
for a client and for ourselves. We
Might round it off just about there and,
and see if anything else comes up, um,
that you've got in terms of answers to questions.
Sure. That's right. Thank you.
Cool. Fire away, Camilla.
Thank you. Thanks very much for joining us.
I lovely to see you in your, your role.
I'll speak to all you for our
committees point of point of view.
Um, there's been three significant reviews of a CC that,
that you've covered covering a large
number of the functions that a CC was internal staffing,
um, the, the way that you deal with people
who have been injured in New Zealand
and also the extremely large asset
that you hold in front on behalf of, of, um, EV participants
and people who would stand to
to receive compensation on behalf of the a CC scheme, uh,
and, and government because
of the huge investment government does make as well.
What of those, um, you said
that you have taken those on board
and you're interested in, in
implementing those recommendations.
What, what actual changes have you
made as a result of those three reviews in terms of
the way a CC functions?
Okay. Um, so the board, um, um, asked for and,
and commissioned an independent review for culture, um,
to see where we stood
and what we could do to make sure that we're high performing
and a safe and and positive environment.
And what we've done, there were 10 recommendations we are
already implementing on, uh, seven of those
and three need some more scoping
before we start implementation.
So we've looked at things like processes, um, on Speak Up,
making it clear where people can speak up
and get their concerns raised
and dealt with, um, policy on, um, um,
behavioral, so it's specific for staff.
The operational review
and the investments review are all focused
and, um, included in the turnaround plan.
They will have different timelines on, you know,
when they'll be implemented,
but you can definitely,
we can definitely see some changes already in terms of,
um, the case management results
that have come from those recommendations.
So all of the recommendations will help us.
And just to follow up, so in terms of the three
that are not yet implemented,
and in terms of the seven that have been already started,
started and accepted, what, what practical changes that made
in a CC, the, the accepted ones,
and then can, if you, you can move on to the three
that you haven't, um, yet accept that you,
you haven't started on yet.
Yeah, so, so in terms of practical changes,
I guess the first thing I'd say is the 10 recommendations
are each quite significant.
Um, we've been really clear, we don't wanna tick a box
and say, yes, we've updated a policy, for example,
in the case of the recruitment policy.
Um, so, uh, yes, we've revised the policy,
but I wouldn't say we are done and dusted
because we actually need to make sure we've got that, um,
communicated across the organization.
Expectations reset and it has to be embedded
and our people have to see
and feel that it's, it's a fair, equitable process.
Um, some practical things are, we've already been out
and engaged all of our people on what it means
to work at a CC to develop a new set of values.
Um, as Jan said, this month, we'll, we'll share
with our people the new strategy, which actually addresses
both the culture review
and the case management review recommendation, which was
to simplify, to get back to the core of what we do
to be really focused
and make it really clear for our people
how the work they do every day aligns
with that core purpose.
So I'd say that is, that is a very live thing at the moment.
Um, some of the, the, the other practical things,
as Dan said, are, are refreshing our speak up policy, um,
changing the provider, their engagement survey or,
or going back out to market for that.
But it's, it's, it's what underpins
that, that's really important.
It's how we do it, how we bring our people with us.
Um, so I, I just don't wanna say
that we've ticked off six recommendations
And, and quite honestly,
creating culture is a long run project.
You can't do things and then expect 'em to change.
You actually have to lead the culture that you want
and demonstrate it on a regular basis.
Yeah. And, and we really valued the feedback
that our people gave us through the culture review.
You know, we, we totally accept that, uh,
as a big bureaucratic organization spread across the
country, we've got work to do to make sure
that every person at Aland c you know, feels really proud
to come and be part of a CC, um, understands why we do some
of the things we do, or why we have to make some
of the trade-offs we make.
So, you know, um, a big part of
that is supporting our almost 500 people leaders to be able
to lead through that so that, you know, that's, that's a,
a big group of, of people, you know, without the, the rest
of the 4,800
or so people that, that we need
to really bring on that journey.
Just, um, follow up from that.
So are you confident now that if a member
of a CC staff has an issue with, um, performance
or conduct of, um, someone senior
to them within the organization, that that will be dealt
with more effectively than it was
prior to the culture review?
Yes, I'm confident
that it'll be dealt with more effectively.
Um, as I say, we need, we still have work to do
to have our people have confidence in that,
so they will speak up.
But yes, I'm confident the processes have been strengthened.
Just, um, the other thing
that we are focusing on in this first part is the turnaround
plan, which was first, um, announced by, mentioned
by the minister on the 1st of October in a media release
that was, um, published.
Um, and I just wondered if you could explain
the progress on that since that date,
and the, uh,
how the different reviews will be feeding into
that two turnaround plan.
So the turnaround plan is a, a multi, um,
step or action and,
and what management is doing,
what the board is oversighting is step
or action by action progress.
Obviously, they have to be prioritized
because you can't do everything at once.
Um, so we are monitoring the, um,
actions against the plan on a monthly basis,
and it contains all of the recommendations out
of the reviews plus some additional things that,
that the board wants to have a look at at the same time.
So when we talk about the turnaround plan, um,
this document that you're working to, is this, um,
this something that you are gonna be sharing with, um,
in a more formal sense?
Yes. And, and what's the timeframe on that?
Um, I think it has to go to minister
and then I think it will be published.
Um, so it'll be a published with the strategy
Is Okay, I suppose.
Um, I wonder what the delay was in the sense
that we've had a media release from the minister on the
1st of October when out the 1st of December,
saying it will be made shortly.
Why is that the plan that you are already working to
not being made public?
I think, yeah, from, from our point of view, um,
we developed the turnaround plan in response to the reviews.
It's actually essentially our
business plan for the coming year.
And it has some actions that go beyond that.
Um, we've been reporting on it internally since July,
I think, um, it will, it will evolve as we go.
Um, but, but it sets out the sort of 40 plus actions
that are really important in response to the three reviews.
Plus, as Jan says, other things we need to do to turn
around rehab performance,
the minister's been really clear publicly that he wants us
to improve more.
Um, and so, you know, this, this is our response to that.
And, and you know, when the,
when it's when it's the right time for that
to be made public, you know, it will be, but,
but from our point of view,
we're focused on delivering against the plan. Okay.
And It's a working document.
So we'll go to ji. Thank you.
So my question is about your
performance against the strategic.
Uh, I see that, um, all except one, uh,
all are achieved except one which is ongoing.
This is about, um,
saying we will be increasing the value delivered
through treatment and patient services.
Why high quality if can,
and effective commissioning of health services?
And this will include shifting to a model
of value-based commissioning, including the design
of a new end to end commissioning model.
Can you elaborate on ongoing,
and I mean, what are the challenges there that this was a,
like, kind of achieved?
Yeah, yeah.
Uh, it, it's a big, um, deliverable to, to transform
how we commission across to four
and a half billion dollars of procured services.
Um, uh, look, we had some changes in,
in personnel along the way,
but also, um, what we have delivered is,
is I would say getting the, the foundations in place,
understanding the performance of our current sort of, um,
contracting landscape.
Understanding where, um,
where we've got the most opportunity to deliver more value.
And those two areas are in specifically primary care, uh,
and secondary care or the elective surgery space for us.
And so that's where the focus has been in terms of how
that was described in April 20, 24, before the year began.
You know, we, we haven't, we haven't delivered what
that described because we, we, I guess we
repurposed ourselves to focus on the two areas
where we saw the most opportunity, where the
provided, um, landscape was most ready to work with us.
And that's in primary and secondary care.
It's also where we'd seen, um, the, the biggest opportunity
to work with providers. So,
Yeah. So in, in
this, uh, like obviously the cost of providers,
uh, the contracts is involved.
Uh, how is that looking like?
Is, is that like a kind of a challenge?
Uh, the cost of contracts?
Well, I think it's more important
to look at the value we get from the contracts.
You know, the, our health providers are the people
delivering the surgery, the rehabilitation, the treatment
that actually helps people get back
to work and independence.
And so, um, yes, it's, it's, um, it's a big cost
to the scheme, but it's actually how we get people back
to work and ultimately make the scheme
sustainable long term.
We're always looking for ways to be more efficient.
We're having conversations with providers
and groups of providers about how we can do that together.
Um, we're doing what we can to maintain, um,
growth in costs, but that's on both the demand side
and the supply side.
So again, the thing in our control is the demand
and, you know, how many people, for example, need surgery.
Um, we're gonna start from ground, which is
before we go there, but, so we'll just keep, um, as much
as we can focused on the overview and the,
and the three reviews at the moment.
And then we'll start moving a bit wider further down.
But we'll, we'll finish this slide
and then if we could just keep,
Yeah, just, just quickly, um, the,
do you benchmark those costs with anywhere else, like,
you know, Australia
or something that give an idea of how your costs stack up
with other, from your providers?
Uh, one thing I would say is every scheme
is quite different.
Um, and so we've gotta be careful, there are some things
that are useful to compare.
Mm-hmm. Um, but even the way we, uh, purchase services
compared to some other systems where they may, you know,
access more of it through, for example,
the public health system versus private does
make it hard to compare.
Um, we, uh, we can do benchmarking, um,
in, on international data if that's available.
Um, and wherever we can, we'll do, again, back to that point
of how do we know we're being efficient,
But, but for example, cost
of a knee replacement from Australia versus New Zealand.
I'll just, do you look at that
Properly? Yeah. Yes, we can. We
can look at those.
And as long as you allow for the caveats,
Then yes, it's helpful.
Okay. And also between the costs, um, for us
and the Health New Zealand, that has also been a focus.
Yeah. I just wanted to, um, go back
to the turnaround plan.
'cause this is, um, one of our parts
of our structured review stage.
And I know you said that you're working towards it,
but you've got further considerations.
What, what are, what are the things
that you are thinking about for inclusion, that plan?
And is there, is there anything, um,
a bit difficult about having a plan that's you working
to already that's not yet finalized?
Does that, does that affect the, the, the way
that been successfully adhere to it?
If that, if that makes sense.
I think when I said it was a working document,
it is a working document
and as things change, you reprioritize
and refocus, um, issues.
So for example, um, as we look at
how we get people rehabilitated better
and on a more timely basis, we look at factors
that may be impacting that
and we may put that into the turnaround plan
and reprioritize it.
So when I said it was a working document,
it's never final and that's it.
We're going to work to that only it will always have, um,
changes that we either have reprioritized
or found that, okay, well
that didn't work the way we wanted it to,
so let's do this instead.
That's my, and you said
that you're reporting against it already
as well? Yes. Not just
Working to it. Yeah.
So people understand what we're doing currently,
but that doesn't mean to say it is locked in stone.
We won't consider anything else.
You look at the results of what you're doing
and saying, is that the right thing to be doing
and the right, uh, results or should we change
and focus on something else?
So I will put the question to the minister if there's,
you know, information that's obviously within his purview,
um, when we, when we do hear from him,
but is he like, what, what else are you going
to put in the plan that you are waiting on
that would change when it might be available for us
to be able to scrutinize
reporting against that, for example?
I don't think there's anything else
that we're thinking about at the moment.
Maybe conversion rates, but, um, nothing else at the moment.
I think, I think the question, you know, kind of goes to,
to what extent do we experience operational challenges
because the plan's not published?
And the answer is none.
Because ultimately the plan is based on some pretty central
tenants about things that we know we need to shift.
So we know we need to improve rates
of rehabilitation and return to work.
We know that we need to rebuild our case management muscle
and the capability of our frontline
and customer facing teams.
We know we need to make great cover decisions.
We know we need to work more effectively with providers
to get, you know, improved value for money.
Those central tenants of the plan are not going to change
and therefore, you know,
there aren't any ongoing operational issues with,
uh, with that.
I suppose, um, just to comment on that, Mr.
She, if I may just, the, that all sounds sensible.
I suppose the issue is it's our job to, to
scrutinize the activities of the
excellent compensation corporation.
And without visibility on the actual reporting measures
that you are holding yourself to account on
after three quite important and significant reviews.
It's, it's, it's hard for us to do that.
And my understanding is I will put it to the minister
that we still don't have a timeframe from when we are gonna
be able to to do that.
And this is, you know, our opportunity now
and you so I more of a stigma.
But if you have any reflections on that opportunity, thanks.
Okay. Um, in, in terms of the review
plans, uh, one of them was well conducted
by treasury into your investment portfolio and management.
Uh, we were reflecting on the performance benchmark
and how closely a CC has tracked the performance benchmark
over the last five years.
And it raised for me the question of the, uh,
appropriateness of the performance benchmark,
whether it's high enough, um,
or whether it's calculated in such a way that
the answer is always gonna be a close correlation.
Have you got any reflections on that?
So, so, so we can get David up.
I guess just while he's settling in, I would say the, the,
we completely understand the question
and it's a question we ask ourselves regularly, both
through the board investment committee and board.
And as recently as two weeks ago we had a, a,
an investment strategy day where we looked at that,
the long-term performance and what drives it.
Um, and the, and,
and we, we always come back to that's an appropriate, um,
threshold above the benchmark
because what, what David can also talk to
as well is making sure we don't, um,
have unintended consequences of, of changing the,
the level of ambition that,
I'll let you say much better than that.
Are there any specifics you want me to cover?
So the, there's two parts to that question.
One is, um, what drives that correlation?
So is it always gonna be just by the nature
of the calculation of the benchmark that it will always be
as closely correlated as it has been in the last five years?
And then the second part of the question is, is the uh,
performance benchmark high enough given
that close correlation?
Um, or what appears
to be a close correlation over the last five years?
The bulk of the risk by design comes from market risk.
So will by definition have a high correlation.
Now the actual portfolio itself deviates
because we undertake active management.
So we'll hand that out both internally to a range
of portfolio managers and externally.
So we have about nine external managers.
So the, the core of the market risk will
drive that correlation.
Um, it doesn't necessarily have to be that ca
that case any particular year.
It depends, uh, largely depends on
what positions individual portfolio
managers have happen to have made.
So by and large, the answer is yes. And that's by design.
Now, is it high enough now that that's a difficult one
to answer because it has to do with the nature
of the way we build the portfolio.
So we have five schemes,
five separate investment strategies,
and it depends upon the funding status of each one of those.
In other words, the OCL in relation to the size
of the liabilities, the cash flows that are coming in
or out, depending, which has to do with levy, um,
settings in relation to the new claims costs.
So all of that gets taken into account where we set that
and we review that annually
and sometimes even implement more frequently than that.
That is essentially drives the way we design portfolios.
What comes from that essentially is the bond equity
to split as a result.
The, you know, if you've got more inequities, it's expected
to generate higher return compared to bonds.
That's what drives essentially the performance.
Now this was all noted in the Willis Towers Watson.
They were the consultant that did it review.
There isn't a predetermined rate of return you can peg on
'cause it depends, depends upon, as I said, funded status
of each one of those schemes.
But we've got a longstanding investment strategy
design principles which ultimately drive those decisions.
It's always in con combination
with what's happening with liabilities.
Unlike other crown finance institutions,
our assets are linked to the liabilities.
So we're liability matching to the best we can.
So for the, the, to the first part of that question then
around the performance benchmark
and the calculation, given how closely it's correlated
to essentially the performance of the market, how useful is
that as a key reporting tool?
Oh, very important. I mean, you look at,
we are price takers in the world, capital markets.
So when, if you are looking at
how do you design a portfolio, we start
with what's available in the market.
E essentially in oversimplifying things we have
bond like assets and equity like assets.
They're the two key levers.
What we try to do beyond that is beat that.
So that's an additional source of return.
So give you nu numbers here
for 33 years since the inception of the,
The, The, the fund, uh,
we've produced about 9.3% return per annum of that 9.3.
But 1.2% has been active management.
In other words, without having the active management would
be 1.2% per annum, worse off.
Now it's $9 or some percentages, but that's a large number.
So, um, uh, so essentially it's very difficult
to build a portfolio without having
those sort of key building blocks.
And we're price takers when it comes to that.
We just receive the equity return,
we receive the bond return essentially.
Yeah. And we, we focus predominantly on New Zealand
because rock has better liability hedge characteristics.
Okay. Well without taking up too much more time on
that point, I just to on that. Okay.
Um, just when you talk about that 1.2%, what's,
what's been the trend in that over, over
that 33 year period?
Is it pretty constant or
N no, it, it, well it fluctuates.
Now that's just the nature of, you know,
you can't get things right every year.
So we've beaten the benchmark 31 outta 33 years,
but it has declined.
There's a couple of reasons for that.
If you go back 33 years, we were a very, very small fund
as proportion liabilities we're a much smaller part
of the local market and there
were more opportunities to add value.
That's one of the reasons there are others at play too,
but that's one of the major ones we tend
to do well when the markets throw up the opportunities.
And it's been a really reasonably tough environment in which
we have been investing,
but it has been declining over the last few years. Yeah,
Okay. So
ma maybe to round that off with a comment, which I I
happy to take any reflection that you have on it is the,
the focus
that we have on the performance from an investment
perspective that comes through, um, DRIG is, is on the, the,
um, total performance number.
Um, but it might be that, that in our focus
and potentially in, in what is reported, that actually
that active management or, um, breaking that number up
and seeing where the, the areas are that you've got that
and that ability to move the lever is
what we should be looking at more closely given the
correlations to the market of the main number.
Sure, yeah. Yeah.
Um, Camilla,
and then Ji did you have a question here as well?
So just, um, wanted
to just follow up on the culture review
while we're still in this section.
So in the culture review there was some criticisms
of the Speak Up program.
So I wanted to ask two, two things around that.
So firstly, with the Speak Up program, um, if
that's been replaced, what is the new system?
And secondly with the bullying
and harassment, um, approach that a CC has, how has
that substantially changed
or has that changed, uh, following the cultural?
Do you want to talk the, so the, the issue that, um,
came out with the speak up process was there were multiple,
um, channels for people
to make a a a speak up or a complaint
or to, to lodge a concern.
And what we've done is, is clarified the, um,
channel for people to speak up as well.
We've changed the provider. Yep.
Yeah. So it is on that first point, we've now got,
I mean it's a, it's a small thing, but I, but,
but it's a helpful thing on our staff intranet on the front
page of that is a permanent button, which takes you
to a dedicated page,
which is much clearer than we had been previously about
those pathways, depending on the situation
and depending on preference.
So that's a, a practical thing we've done.
We're also looking at the provider of service, um, where
we've redrafted the policy
and guidelines that's getting, uh, launched this month and,
and we'll be carefully communicated.
So there's some practical things we are doing.
Um, but again, it, it sort
of comes back to what I said earlier.
We need to work with our people leaders so
that they're well equipped to have conversations
with their teams to make sure people have
confidence in the process.
'cause that was the other concern that was raised,
that people didn't necessarily trust the process.
Uh, and so that's, that's a bit
of a longer term shift we need to make.
Okay. But just a follow up on that.
So, um, I'm not sure if we touched on the bullying
and harassment changes, although if your answer is
that it is, sorry,
That's policy launch this month.
'cause one of the things was we didn't have a standalone,
uh, policy on bullying and harassment.
You didn't have One. We had, it was,
it was within a behavior policy,
but it wasn't a standalone policy.
And and now you do have one. Yeah. Okay.
Um, in terms of the, uh, reviews
and the changes that you've made, how will you
assess whether these have been successful?
Uh, like what's the formal process for ensuring that, uh,
the changes that you make actually result in meaningful
change for, for the staff at a CC,
It's, it's Quite difficult, um, to assess whether
or not it's made a significant change without effectively
another, uh, review, which we are going
to change the provider for doing staff surveys.
Um, and I would suggest
that the next survey will give us, um,
the indication whether it actually has moved the dial
because in the commentary that you get from staff surveys,
you can see a trend. Yeah.
What was the reason for changing of the provider?
Was there a problem with the previous provider?
So one of the challenges
with the current provider is it's a,
it's quite a rigid annual survey process.
And what we wanna be able to do is move to being able
to have a, an overall survey system that enables us
to do shorter, sharp,
and more frequent, um, sort of pulse surveys as well
as the bigger sort of state
of the organization type surveys.
So we want that flexibility.
Don't you, don't you think that
because of the size of the review
and the, the number of issues that it, that it raised,
that there should be some kind of, you know, not a review
of the same size necessarily,
but just a, a an assessment
of whether the changes have been affected?
So one of the things we did, so,
so even though we are looking at a, a different, um,
mechanism and provider,
we have just done our annual engagement survey.
And what we did in that was we asked a series of,
I think it was about eight questions to baseline
organizational conference or a new set of questions.
And so they will carry on into whatever mechanism we use
for future surveys, so that we'll be able to get quite a,
a quantitative assessment
of whether we're improving those underlying drivers
of organizational culture as well
as the important qualitative signals from,
from the verbatims as well as generally other feedback.
And if, if the pulse surveys and the, the trend
and the, the, the annual type surveys show
that we haven't moved the dial, then yes, we would go back
and have another independent review
or a check on, on what we've done
where we've achieved movement or not.
Okay. Um, I,
I've got it primarily on a different, different areas.
So in, in this part of, um, the script structured agenda,
we're talking about scheme boundaries, uh,
which is an interesting inclusion.
Um, I know that you've said publicly
that there's gonna be no legislative change, uh,
in this parliamentary term or this year.
Clarify, I can't remember exactly what the, um,
timeframe was in terms of the scheme boundaries.
Uh, there were some comments that the minister had made
around the, uh, whether the people
who have been subject to sensitive claims had
we are properly best treated within a CC
or whether that was something
that should be looked at separately, you know,
quite high level comments on that.
I wanted to know, um, if there had been any work, um,
this year, the year in review that, uh,
you had been undertaking in relation to sensitive claims.
Um, and if so, what that was
In terms of scheme boundaries?
So at the moment, um, people who
have sensitive claims are covered under the a CC scheme
and obviously can see that there has a significant, um,
impact on these, the coverage of a CC.
Yep. Is that, um, going to continue
as the minister indicated that it may not in his comments.
So my public comment last week was just re quoting
something the minister had said a week
or two earlier that he didn't have any plans for this term.
But, um, in anything to do with, with legislation
and scheme boundary cities, um, would be a question for mb.
Um, as our policy agency, um, in terms of sensitive claims,
all our work in the last year has been on implementing the
new sensitive claim service,
which went live on the 1st of December,
and also supporting the, the implementation of the, um, tn,
uh, court decision around loss of potential learning.
So that's been our focus.
Okay. Grant, oh, just indicate
to me and then I can give it to you.
Sorry. Um, thank you.
Uh, so the, from your perspective, from a
to a ccc, the best of accs knowledge,
there is no change in relation to sensitive claims.
And if there was a change, that would be a question
we needed to put to mp. Is that, is that correct?
Yeah, we need to put the question to e
So you're not aware of any change?
I can't answer for the record.
There was that, that was no, was it? No, no. Yeah.
Right. Yeah. Um, so around the census of claims area,
what improvements that, uh, be made for survivors
assisting, um, census of claims?
So we probably spoke to the committee last year about the
changes we were preparing to implement.
They were two years in the making working
with survivors advocates
and providers, um, in response to challenges for survivors
around, um, how long they had to wait for, um,
clinical support and also the lack
of flexibility within the service.
Um, it was quite one size fits all.
So on the 1st of December, the changes went live,
it gives a couple of different pathways for survivors.
Um, there's a, a, a rapid sort of, um, I would say
lighter support pathway that suits many survivors.
Um, it means they don't have to go through a full,
a very detailed, um, clinical assessment.
And for, for survivors who need more, there's a pathway.
The idea was that, um, by having less people go
through the full review process,
it would create more capacity
for the people who really needed it.
Look, it's still early days.
Um, we we're, you know, we we're still seeing, um,
high demand for the service.
Um, in a year's time we'll be able
to talk about what's different and,
and how survivals have found it,
but really the, the,
the focus has been getting the service stood up, getting all
of our existing clients transitioned by the end of May, um,
and making sure that we're supporting the,
I think there's about 300 new providers who've joined the
service, um, which is really important to be able
to manage wait times, um, for,
but that's really been the focus as in
Yeah, just a, a a, a follow up on that.
So I think what you're saying that, um, we,
I figure when we be able to show
that you've actually really improved in that space,
it's gonna be a bit more time work through,
or in terms of the, in terms of the, um,
because there's quite a bit of s and how you've handled it.
So, so you suggesting that's gonna be another 12 months
or so we can really show that
There are clients who tend to be, um, with a CC
for quite a long time.
Yeah. And so we need to give the service the chance
for those clients to get the new treatment mechanisms
and understand if that's helping them to reach a level
of independence and, you know,
and literally being able to get on
with their lives sooner than under the old service.
Um, final question for me in this part, just when it comes
to scheme boundaries,
given there's been some conversation about that,
what is the value to a CC of having really clear boundaries
to what is included
and excluded in terms of scope
to your planning to the organization,
to your investment planning?
Um, look at, you know, it would be lovely if,
if it was a perfectly defined boundary,
but you know, boundaries are gray.
Um, over the 50 years, um,
various court decisions precedents, um,
do shift the boundary of the scheme.
Um, you know, we've got, uh, people both within MB
and a CC who work really hard to make sure that we're able
to implement good operational policy in response to changes.
Um, I I would say it's, it's quite dynamic.
New Zealand itself has changed in 50 years, so,
so our job is to implement, you know,
the scheme within the boundaries
And you are also dealing with people and their complex
and different claims, and it, it's hard to be totally
specific about what's covered
and it's also dangerous to be not specific enough.
So you've got this sort of dynamic between the two sort
of ends of the spectrum.
Yeah, I, I mean, I, I've probably a, a, um,
supplementary answer is, you know, as stewards
of the scheme, we have a responsibility back to
that responsibility to levy payers to do, do our best
to make sure that we're funding things
that fit within the scheme boundary.
So yes, sometimes that can be gray, um,
and I recognize that can be really difficult for the clients
who sit at the gray boundary,
but we also need to make sure that, that
what the actuaries calculate we should be funding, you know,
in terms of levies is what we're, we're funding in practice.
Uh, quick supplementary on that.
In your initial remarks, you mentioned that
for some claims it takes around 57 days you mentioned.
So those are the kind of claims they would set in this,
where it's like unsure the boundary
is set the right conclusion.
And if so, like how many of those claims which are taking
so long, uh, what is it a like percentage,
which actually it's realized
that actually they don't sit in the boundary?
Yeah, it's like less than 3%,
Less Than 3% don't sit in the
Bar. Oh, sorry. Uh,
The 57 day average relates to about 3% complicated
Only 3% cases.
So they're The complicated claims complic,
they're not necessarily grade boundaries, it's just,
it might be hearing loss
or something where you actually need to do quite a bit
of assessment to understand the person's
Situation. Okay. Okay. Thank
you. Okay.
Okay. Um, we're gonna move to parts of the agenda now,
which is the financial performance of a CC in 20 24, 25.
Um, so happy to take questions a moment. Thank
You. Um,
I've got a question around long-term claimants.
So recently there was 8,000 long-term claims
removed from the A CC pool, which is a significant number
of New Zealanders obviously being, um,
quite severely injured.
Uh, can you explain how that came about
and what, uh,
and why a CC undertook that procedure
to remove these long-term s
So the first thing is they're not necessarily people
that are fairly injured, it's fair to say.
Um, and you're talking about, um,
the, the, the people
who have left the long-term claims pool, not the number
of people that have come in.
So net net you're actually nowhere near 8,000.
Um, and what we've found is that
as a result of changing to one-to-one case managers,
there's a lot of people with non-serious injuries
that once we have put a case manager
for them, particularly, that either
they've got the right rehabilitation, um, to allow them
to come outta that pool
or, um, there've been other ways that they've been,
um, have left the pool.
So the 8,000 is a number,
but it was bit of a distraction actually,
and that, that number's being quoted without the background.
That's correct. It's a correct number though.
Yeah, there were 8,000. It's, it told half the story.
I've got a couple more supple on that, um, Mr.
Chair, if that's okay. Mm-hmm.
So you've also said to us that
rehabilitation times are getting longer, not shorter,
but can you just explain how that works with at
around 20% reduction in long term claims when the
rehabilitation claims are getting longer?
Um, yes.
Well, the long-term claims pool is people that have been
in the, in the scheme for, um,
greater than one year on weekly compensation.
And of that 24,000
that's in long term claims for 15,000 are people
with not what are classified as non-serious injuries.
So, um, what we have been looking at is
what we have done in terms of, um,
rehabilitating those people, is it appropriate?
And now that there's one-to-one management, we can assess
what more we need to do.
And, um, the timetable,
Um, how many of that one, how much of that one
to month management is being done by a person
and how much of it is being done through ai?
All person? So there's no use of ai No.
In the assessment of the long-term claim process at all.
So just to be, to be really clear, yeah.
Um, every single person in the long-term claims.
So if we step back by definition, these are people
that have been in receipt of weekly compensation for,
for more than 12 months.
And when we were here with you sort of 12 months ago,
we were talking about the investment
and a significant number of additional case managers to work
with these clients one to one.
Now for quite a period of time
after changes to our case management system in 20 18, 20 19,
these were people that did not have the benefit
of a case manager working with them.
So no single person had an
end-to-end view across their claim.
We made that change and we were talking
about that 12 months ago.
You are now seeing the impacts of
that reflected in our return to work results, um,
that are improving across the board.
Now, in all instances, we do have, you know, uh, uh,
a fairly, um, young and tenure workforce.
We've hired quite a lot
of new people across the organization in the last 12 months.
And so we are committed to, um, delivering them
with decision tools that support them
to make better decisions.
But I can be really clear that there is no AI
that is making decisions about which clients can
or can't, um, you know, continue
to access weekly compensation.
Is AI recommending which clients
should we probably not be?
No. In the first, in the first instance,
where we've been focusing our ai, for example,
is in our contact centers.
So we've quite specifically, uh, introduced some technology
that produces an automatic summary of a phone call, uh,
that one of our agents has.
So that's after call work that would
otherwise wouldn't nearly be manually inputted by a,
a contact center representative.
So that's now, you know,
resulting in quite a significant increase in capacity in
that part of, um, in that part of the team.
Where we've focused next, for example,
is in our clinical services team.
And one of the things that the team tells me is
that when they receive a task
to provide clinical advice on a claim, they can spend 70%
of their time going back
and reviewing what in some cases can be
years and years of detail.
So what we're doing in, in this, uh, you know,
this next period is investing in certain technology
that will provide a summary of the entire claim in order
that then that clinical advisor can get
to a decision that they need to make.
So this is not about replacing humans,
making great judgements,
this is about certain more effective decisions
that free capacity.
Just to start on the ai, have you had any humor? Ai Yeah.
One more on this area, but not on ai. Okay. Okay.
So just, uh, the question that was asked
included a reference to the role of AI in considering cases,
um, in the future.
Do you see any reason why, um,
as a first step in a process at the very least
that wouldn't be possible or shouldn't be used?
Um, I think what I think what I would say is
that our experience of the last, you know, sort of, um, two
or three years in particular is that there is no replacement
for fantastic case management.
Um, that, that is not to say that there, there won't be, uh,
technologies into the future that make some of
that work more effective and more efficient.
But what we are seeing today, the performance results
that we are delivering, which in some cases are better than
we've delivered for nearly a decade.
Yes, they are being achieved
'cause of more humans, hugely talented,
committed people applying human judgment at the level
of the claim, making good decisions
And Absolutely.
And was not a question about people and case management,
but was around the ability to determine
on first bet if something can just go straight
through and be approved.
So the use of AI in some of those areas?
Yeah, so we, we currently, um, use,
use a tool at the front door of this,
of the scheme based on sort of, you know, millions
and millions of claims worth of data.
Um, and that's,
and that's a, that's a static, uh, algorithm behind
that tool that drives some
of the auto acceptance decisions that we make.
As we've talked about, we receive 2.1 million claims in the,
uh, in the last, uh, 12 months.
So it's not true that there is a human being across every
single one of those claims that's thousands
of claims coming into the scheme every day.
So we do use some technology to, to enable some
of those simple, uh, cover decisions to be made. And, and,
And you remember 80% are accepted within 24 hours
And humans couldn't do that.
No. That's why I just wanted to clarify. Yeah.
Off, but just before we go there,
one last question on AI for me.
Um, as a sub there, is there any reason you couldn't use
AI alongside your human case management as a,
at the very least, a learning tool to understand where,
um, you are getting it really right,
and where there's opportunities to improve?
Like it seems to me
that it's not necessarily one or the other. Yeah,
I mean, we are very early on in our AI journey
as an organization,
and I think there are a range of opportunities
for the technology to amplify
and to augment what it is that our people do.
And we are very open to those opportunities.
Okay. I'll go to JI and then I'll go to March.
This is on weekly compensation question, so, but, um, I
We'll go, we'll come round. Yeah.
So mine is on weekly compensation.
Uh, the other part of that question, so with the, uh, yeah,
with new staff coming on, new GI managers coming on,
you mentioned that getting back to work,
but the weekly compensation days are increasing.
So how do we comprehend that?
Um, it's a really good question.
Um, so, um, you know, buckle in for the response.
Um, so, so one of the measures that you'll see
that we didn't meet in our service agreement
for the previous 12 months,
so the period under review was average weekly
compensation days paid.
Uh, I think we achieved 74.7 days against a target
of 73.5 days.
Now, one of the things about
that measure is it only calculates, uh, the, the average
of weekly compensation days paid for clients
that have been on weekly compensation for less than a year.
So the moment a client fits over into the long-term claims
pool and receives 366 days of weekly compensation,
they are removed from the calculation.
So we didn't hit the target
because in the last nine months we've been really focused on
helping to prevent crossovers into the long-term claims
for clients that hadn't previously had the
benefit of a case manager.
'cause what we also know is that the longer
that a client is away from work, the harder it is
for them to get back into work.
And so we've been working really hard to make sure
that we could prevent clients crossing over
into the long-term claims pool.
What that perversely meant is
that the average weekly compensation days paid measure was
dragged up, uh, in 74.7 days, which is kind
of a bit perverse because,
because it is actually a success story.
Yeah. Okay. Uh, Mike,
and then I'll come back to Thanks.
And this is stuff on the ai, um, just curious,
like there was an overseas report that showed that 77% of,
um, employees leak data, um, for your chat, GPT.
And so I'm just curious about, I guess,
what private information has been entered into, um, AI
and what other proper safeguards you've got to ensure
that actually it's not going to some server
and that information's been kept.
Thank you. So, so we do have, um, copilot as an,
as an enterprise tool, um, which, which enables us to use it
and retain the data within a CC.
Um, it is an issue, um, and we watch it really carefully.
Uh, we, um, it's part of our internal audit program.
We have a policy, uh,
but you know, we're also really aware that, that, um,
workers are really curious about what they can do with ai.
So it's just about, you know, vigilance around making sure
that we are using it appropriately, um, making sure
that we're we are keeping privacy, um,
at the forefront of people's minds.
And how, how often, I guess so not do you order
that information to ensure that actually that information
that people are entering into, um, copilot,
it's not containing
or private information that could actually be captured.
Yeah. In terms of the frequency of audits, we'd have
to come back to you on that.
I suspect it's almost real time.
One thing we are seeing is in some of our four systems,
so our, our, um, smart telephony system, genesis,
uh, increasingly AI is being built into those systems,
which is quite a safe way for us to be able to apply ai.
And that's how we're using it in our contact center.
It's, it's integrated into the technology,
which makes it very safe from a data point of view.
Okay. Thank you. Alright.
I just had, um, I did have one follow up ai,
and in another question in relation to long-term claimants.
So you said that, um, AI is being utilized
and accepting claims with declining claims.
Can you give us assurance that AI is not lining claims with?
No, um, in an oversight of that determination,
We can certainly be really clear that where
entitlement suspension decisions are being made,
there is a human being across every single
one of those decisions.
And in fact, um,
we are an entitlements being suspended not only
as the case manager involved in that decision,
but so too as their team leader.
So another question along long-term claims.
How many of those 8,000 people, uh,
who were long-term claimants who are now no longer, um,
eligible for that compensation, how many of them, uh, were
how many of their doctors, uh, said
that they were, uh, work ready?
Do you or are you aware that there are people within
that pool whose, whose doctors had
not certified them ready for work? Correct
Question. So if again,
if we, if, if we come back for someone
to be in the long-term claims pool in the first place, A,
they have to have been receiving weekly
compensation for more than a year.
And b, they need to continue
to be providing a valid medical certificate
provided by a general practitioner or a nurse practitioner.
Now to the point that the chair was making earlier.
So we had 8,000 people leave the long-term claims
pool in the last 12 months.
At the same time, we had a vast number of people arrive.
And so every week there are people
that are arriving into the scheme
and certified as unfit to work.
Uh, and every week there are people
who are leaving the scheme.
So in terms, in terms of, in terms of your question,
for the most part, people leave the scheme when their GP
forms a view that they are no longer in incapacitated
and can return to work.
In which case, what happens is
that a medical certificate just stops arriving into a CC,
our case manager picks the phone up
and says, how are you doing?
And we find that someone's returned to work.
So by far and away, that is
what happens in the majority of instances.
Now where we do continue
to receive medical certificates from a gp,
for a client who's covered injury seems
to be reasonably simple or straightforward,
or at least their continued incapacity doesn't feel
like it makes sense to us.
Um, we'll, in the first instance, speak with the client,
we talk to the gp, we might refer the client
to an independent medical assessment, um, or,
or to another specialist.
Um, but we will always have regard to the medical evidence
and more broadly, you know, clinical
and other evidence available to our people on the claim
before we make a decision.
So there are people whose doctors say they're not work
ready, who are no longer eligible for
Work. It, it is
entirely possible that a,
that a treating GP may continue
to furnish medical certificates.
But for example, a specialist provides us with advice to say
that, that they disagree with that view,
or we ref, we refer that client
to an independent medical assessment undertaken
by an occupational health, um, specialist.
And there is a different view formed.
So will there just a final one on this.
So then will there always be a differing medical view
that says they are work ready when people are assessed
that they're no longer entitled to this?
Is that always the case
that you receive a a different, a different view?
No, not, not at all.
So we might refer someone
to an independent medical assessment
and that assessment confirms the fact that they are,
you know, they're not work ready, they continue
to be incapacitated, then they need the compensation.
Right. And they would continue to be entitled.
So those who haven't, yeah.
So for the people who, the situation where we have,
and we've acknowledged that this does occur,
and this has been to us as well, that people
are receiving long-term compensation.
They, they are receiving medical certificates saying they're
not work ready from their gp.
Yeah. Um, then they are, that's questioned
by A-C-C-A-C-C gets a, a different assessment.
Um, would you always get, uh,
either an occupational health specialist
or another specialist to say, no, I disagree with the gp,
and they are work ready in instances
where you remove them from the long term claims.
So those assessments will always be undertaken
by a specialist or by one of, so 44, um,
independent occupational
assessors that we have around the country.
So I suppose, sorry, my question is though, will,
would they always, would the specialist always say
they are work ready?
Would there always be a,
Would always be a, a necessary
difference in opinion between Yes. No,
There wouldn't always. So,
so there are people who are being assessed
by their gps is not work ready
and specialist is not work ready,
but a CCC is still removing them.
No, no, no. Sorry, that was the question. Apologies. No.
So, so there is always the need for a medical assessment
that says that they are work ready before the Exodus? Yes,
Yes. So, so,
so the accident compensation act is
really, is really clear.
We, we have to, so, so, uh, a medical certificate has
to be furnished, which evidence is in, in capacity.
And at that point, it's for, you know, the,
the client is entitled to services,
Just a, at the risk of needing to buckle in even tighter,
um, these 44 independent medical assessors
are assessing the person from partic from a particular lens
of is the injury that, that they've got covered
for rehabilitated.
And then there's a question, could they go back to the type
of work they were doing, the next level
of assessment could be,
could they do some other type of work?
And so it's quite a different question
to the one a GP might look at, which is,
can this person work?
So we are looking at it from the point of view
of is the injury that they have cover for rehabilitated
as opposed to perhaps with the gp it could be,
there's other things going on for that person
that means they can't work.
And so you can end up in violent agreement, if you like,
around the, the situation for the person.
But looking at it from the point of view of the
what legislatively we can provide versus
what the person might, you know, present with to their gp.
Yeah, just
Belts and braces, like his last question.
So the, there will always be someone independent, whether
that's doctor or occupational health specialist,
pressure doctors, who will say that the claimant is able
to undertake some work
before they, uh, lose, um, long-term claims compensation.
So, so I guess there, there are other pathways so
that it could be that a person hasn't been meeting the
obligations on them.
So if you get away from this, uh,
have they been rehabilitated?
So there are some other scenarios if that's
what you are Yeah.
Referring to. And there is also the scenario
where the person decides that they're able to go back
to work, um, somewhere along that pathway or,
or, you know, makes their own decision. So,
So maybe just for clarity, so
if someone's on long-term claims
and they, their long-term claim stops, it's stopping for
the fact I've decided to go back to work.
They've no longer received receiving a medical certificate.
They've received a medical certificate from the gp,
but the specialist has disagreed with that.
Are there any other pathways? I think that's what we,
Yeah, that's, Uh, if we suspend, yeah.
So the simplest, the simplest way of explaining that is
to say, uh, that, that a, a client will cease access
to weekly compensation if, um,
that there is a medical opinion
that incapacity no longer exists.
So that is the client has rehabilitated, yeah. Number one.
Or if incapacity does continue to exist,
but it does not relate to the injury
that the client was covered for in the first place.
That's the second pathway.
And the third pathway is if the client continues to
to be incapacitated and that's evidenced by a clinician
and, um, that incapacity means they can't return
to their pre-injury work type, then it's a,
a vocational independence pathway
that we would work with that client on.
That is we would help them to identify other jobs
that they might be able to do,
and we would invest in vocational rehab to prepare them
to be able to do that work type.
So those are essentially the three ways that in Yeah.
Then outcome
of independence from the scheme is achieved. Okay.
So does that answer the question? Yeah,
I, I've got a follow up, but,
Um, I wanna go to, before we go there, wait, sorry, Ji,
can I just, the audio, something's happened
and, okay, thanks ine. So
Just want to understand from you for
how long we have had this process, had this process
that you've just explained for
how long we have had this process of assessing claims. So,
So for, for, for the longest time. Yeah.
Thank you. Okay. So can I pass this up on that?
So I suppose this is relevant
because we've had a significant, um, departure of a,
of people from the long term claims, which is
still statistically significant.
Okay. So even though we've just said
that this process has existed for a long time,
have there any have, has A-C-A-C-C changed any aspects
of those settings in the year under?
So, So I think if we come back to, um, something
that we talked about with the committee this time a year
ago, so rehabilitation performance has been
declining for more than a decade.
Mm-hmm. So that is across the board.
We have seen a decade in which every year more people have
been accessing weekly compensation for longer
and a range of other entitlements than before.
So the big change to your question about what's a big change
that's been made in the year under review,
the big change was a move fundamentally back
to one-to-one case management for a large number of clients.
In fact, now all of our clients, um, that are in receipt
of weekly compensation, the reason for that is
because our view was if a client is so sufficiently injured
as to be able to, um, you know, unable to work,
then they deserve a case manager
that has an end-to-end view across, across their claim.
That is the single biggest change
that we've made in the last 12 months.
Now, in terms of those case managers,
we created dedicated teams working specifically
with those long-term claims for clients.
Great. I'm just gonna pause there.
We're just gonna check the marks,
but Okay.
That, we'll see if that solves it. Thank you. Um, okay.
Is does it up or New question. Okay.
So Mike, and then I've got a primaries from
Vanessa, and then we'll come back.
Okay, thanks. Just to do the case managers have performance
Targets to meet Instance.
So, uh, all staff across the organization, um, have a series
of what we call PDC, so, you know,
development conversation objectives that they need
to, they need to achieve.
Um, but if, but if, but if the question is, are our staff
specifically incentivized to, um, you know,
to exit people from the scheme through,
through performance targets?
The answer is no.
I mean, ultimately all of our people, all of us
have signed up to a target,
and as the chair said, that Target is an A CC
that today is delivering the services
and supports the New Zealanders need,
and that tomorrow is around to be able
to deliver those services
because they, you know, they matter.
Um, so, you know, as you, as you would expect
for any organization that's got such a sort of laudable, um,
you know, aspiration, there are a series of service quality
and service performance targets that we track
that give the board our minister, uh,
and us as an executive confidence
that we're on the right track towards, um,
those, those ambitions.
So they do include things like return to work rates, uh,
long-term claims, pool numbers,
and long-term claims pool growth rate.
They also include client satisfaction,
public trust, and confidence.
Um, you know, the proportion of our revenue
that flows directly to, you know, to those
who are on the receiving end of our services.
So th those are all things which we do measure.
And the REM review for the individuals are tied
to those performance targets.
Uh, uh, that, so our staff receive an annual remuneration
review, as I said,
every staff member across the organization, starting
with the chief executive
and cascading through all of our people have a series
of objectives to meet, um, that, that is in our view,
consistent with any, any organization, uh, that is,
that is committed to, to high performance.
Okay. Final start on this one, Jamala.
So can you confirm then, from what you've just said,
that the reduction in long-term claimants by eight,
approximately 8,000 people
or 20%, uh, was not to do with the current minister of accs
specific direction to you
and his letter of expectations that he expected
to see reduction in long-term claims?
So, so the 8,000 is a number that's important
because as Michael says, it's 8,000 people
actually getting either back to work
or back to being independent
and getting, you know, being able
to move on with their life.
We have, at the moment almost 25,000 people in the
long-term claims pool.
In that same period under review, we had 9,900 people
move into the long-term claims pool.
So that pool is still growing.
Um, it's been growing at a quite a significant
rate for a decade.
Um, we are really focused on, uh, as I said this,
this is about supporting people back
to work in independence.
Um, it's while that that pool's still growing,
that means there are still more
and more people every week who are, you know,
off work for longer than a year.
What we're seeing is the number
of seriously injured clients isn't growing.
It's been quite steady over a number of years,
which is a positive thing for New Zealand.
Mm-hmm. Um, but it's these less seriously injured clients,
and in particular, people who are recorded
as having sprains strains in particularly backs, shoulders,
knees, uh, huge number
of those from injuries within home and community.
So 66% of our new claims last in, in the year
before, so probably similar last year
happened in the home and the community.
So, so these are the people that we really need
to make sure we're helping them early,
getting them on the right track to recovery so
that they don't become long-term reliant on the scheme.
So I think we've just gotta take that 8,000 in context.
I think the year before it was well over 7,000,
so it's not a, it's not an enormous difference,
but it's, you know, it's, it's a lot of, a lot more people
who are able to, to move on with their lives. Okay.
Vanessa Winnick, thank you. Um, if it's all right, um, Mr.
Chair, I'd like to move on about
healthcare clean commission.
So we on the structured, oh,
Yep. Is
That all right? I don't know
too far here. Just gimme the time.
We far with, oh, it's all part of part two. That fine.
That one. Okay, good. Um, thank you so much.
Um, so the, the costs that are incurring
'cause of the, uh, rises and both the volumes
and the costs of, um, interventions
for health interventions, um, I'm just wondering, um,
when we look at, um, for things like surgery versus, um,
physiotherapy, things like that, um, do we consider, uh, do,
does a CC take into account when considering, um, options
for surgery that it may speed up the return to, um,
good work or recovery?
Is that, is that overall cost taken into account when you
think of, um, for, for each case?
Or is it only done on the basis of what the cost
of the intervention is? So, so
It is absolutely client dependent.
Yeah. So it's about the clinical advice, the clinical, um,
recommendations around what's going support that person back
to worker independence quickly.
Well, it's also being good for the individual as well. Yeah.
So, um, how much time
and, uh, money does a CC spend, um, fighting, um,
reviews and, um, re and, um,
and declining, uh, recommendations by surgeons for surgery?
So I think this comes back to the other, um, part
of our role as good stewards of the scheme, which is
to ensure that we're only funding things that are within
accs legislative remit.
Um, you know, we've talked
before about the unfortunate fact
that we're all getting older.
And so what we are really,
what we've been really focused on in the,
in the last year is making sure
that we're funding funding surgery related
to an a CC covered injury.
Mm-hmm. Um, not, not related to whether it's degeneration
or, you know, wear and tear or other things.
And so that's a really, um,
really important distinction for us.
Um, it's, it's, it's one of those gray areas
and sometimes, you know, can require quite a bit
of specialist advice.
Yeah. Um, MRIs and what have you. Yeah.
So are we able to have a figure of how much money, um,
and time a c spends fighting, um,
and, um, arguing those cases versus how much it would cost
to just pay for them and do it?
Well, it's part of case management
and the clinical advice team, we wouldn't be able
to give a figure on how much of our time is dealing with
what, what, what become declined decisions.
Um, what, what we did see last year,
and it's in the annual report, is
that there was a significant, um,
increase in the outstanding claims liability due
to the increase in elective surgery costs.
I think that added about half a million dollars
to the long term liability.
Um, so that, you know, that's something
that we'll just continue to look at on a case by case basis.
We're working with surgeons, um, to help them understand,
um, you know, the considerations around
accident versus degeneration.
Um, and, and that's part of, you know, us giving feedback
to surgeons as well about what we see in terms of, um,
the data on their, um, surgery
and also the return to work rates
of their patients. Mm-hmm.
And I think that's clear.
We, we are trying to work in partnership with surgeons
as providers and helping them to assess, um,
the soldier shoulder assessment tool, um, working with them
to, to a, assess injuries and, and here's a decision chain,
and then b, look at the return to work stats,
because you're right, the longer people are off work,
the more it costs us as well.
So looking at both the, the, the decision to have surgery
and the rationale and then the return to work costs,
and we're helping them to understand where their performance
is sitting compared to their peers,
which I don't think they had visibility over
Before. I guess my,
if I may, the last last one for me is, um, has,
um, a CC considered, um, doing an assessment of
the costs of, um, of, um, your,
the resistance within the organization for, um,
covering some of the things that may have a contribution,
some of those gray areas, as you mentioned,
where there may be an element of some degeneration
if it just, if the cost of the overall system, um,
but the health system long term, the, the overall, um, a CC
if, if that actually, it may actually be cheaper
to just go ahead and do more of that
where there is a question, um, has,
has it ever been considered to be looking, when,
when you're talking about being good stewards, is
that something that you've considered looking at?
I think that that goes to where does the cost lie?
Does it lost, does it sit with Health New Zealand
because they will be the ones doing the surgery if it's not
us or with us.
And we have a responsibility
to act within our boundary requirements
and also to, you know, we've got levy payers.
Mm-hmm. Um, and, and also taxpayers funding the scheme.
So we have to be mindful of where our funding's coming from
compared to where health themselves.
But I get the, you speak a lot, there's a lot
of legal time spent and reviews
and things like that sometimes and, and,
and looking at some of those areas,
and if you, if you didn't spend the money on the lawyers,
you could just be spending the money on
doing the operations.
Well, I think to the point that the,
that the chairs made our, our job is to manage
to the boundaries of the scheme as the legislation sets out.
And I think, um, what I'd also add is
that from a review perspective, we consider that the,
the opportunity for every client to be able
to review a decision that we make where
that decision involves a decline.
Uh, we think that's in a really important part
of the natural justice process that underpins public trust
and confidence in a c.
So from our, from our perspective, yes,
we have seen an increase in the number of reviews.
There is some cost associated with supporting that process,
but certainly from our perspective, public trust
and confidence in the scheme is something
that our minister has called out,
um, as being really important.
It's something that we think, uh, is, is,
uh, is really important.
Um, and so no, we haven't had specifically the conversation
about what would happen if we funded a bunch of things
that are not within our boundaries, um, in order
to consider the impact on New Zealand Incorporated.
That's a broader policy question.
Okay. Uh,
Yeah. Thanks Chair. Um,
I have some questions on
investment and ethical investment.
Yep. Policies, guidelines.
So first up, I just, I wondered whether, um,
in the last year
or the period in question there's been any, um,
developments in, in your policies
and guidelines in the way you've approached, uh,
physical investment, particularly screening and exclusions?
Yes. Um,
From a policy perspective, Um, there
we've had three reviews, really, two internal,
one external as you know.
Um, so the board has reviewed the application
of the ethical investment policy regarding the issues
that were raised in the last select committee,
and confirmed that it's comfortable with the approach.
The second review was the board, uh,
undertakes annual reviews of the policy itself.
There was reaffirmed the policy settings were fit
for purpose, um, in May of this year,
that's published on our website.
And then lastly, there was an external review,
which covered the full range
of investment management operation,
of which ethical investment formed a part of it.
And that review established a few things, uh, firstly that
a CC has a robust, well integrated,
responsible investment framework that aligns
with legislative requirements and international standards.
Uh, and it confirmed that we're a responsible member
of the world community.
So it was a pleasing outcome from all those reviews.
It reaffirms that we're fit for purpose
and we're well placed and well operated
to continue producing long term returns.
But by and large, the core
of the policy has remained in place as it has been, um,
given the external reviews and the two internal ones.
Okay. So no significant changes No.
As a result of those three? No.
Could I just, um, uh, ask
that you provide the committee, uh, through you, Mr.
Chair, um, the external report that you
Referenced? Yes, sure.
That would be really helpful. Absolutely.
And, and perhaps a link to the board minute
or whatever that you cited as well,
Regarding which The second point you made
that the board may five policy,
The reaffirmation of the policy. Yeah,
Yeah, yeah. And any
and any background documents
to support it, that would be great.
We'll put that in as a follow up question. Yeah, thank you.
Um, so I, I know you'll be aware that, um,
over the last couple of years there's been a great deal
of international interest and the conflict in Gaza.
Um, the International Court of Justice, uh,
also released an advisory opinion on Israel's illegal
occupation in the Palestinian Territories, uh,
that called on all third countries to, uh, ensure
that they were not acting in any way they would aid
or assist their legal obligation.
Then government has subsequently voted a number
of times in support of the,
that resolution at the United Nations.
Um, so I wondered whether, um, you had, uh, reviewed
accs investments in light of, uh, those UN resolutions,
the ICJ advisory opinion, uh,
and, uh, whether, you know, if there are any companies
that you're investing in directly
or indirectly that are on the United Nations, um,
human Rights Commission database of companies
that are complicit in their legal settlements?
Sure. Um, as you know,
ethical investment is a complex area.
Um, there's strong opinions in this area too.
Uh, but we obviously take this seriously.
Now, what I can confirm is we comply
with all international sanctions,
so UN Security Council sanctions, we comply
with New Zealand sanctions in this regard.
Um, and we, like I said, we've had our policy reviewed,
which confirms that we align with international standards
and it's, and responsible member.
Now, I, I asked you a specific question.
I'm not asking about UN sanctions or New Zealand sanctions.
I know I'm talking about the United Nations database
of companies that are complicit in the illegal settlements,
um, settlements that have been, uh, identified
as illegal under international law
by the ICJ and New Zealand.
New Zealand government's position is on the record
multiple times, uh, supporting that position.
So I'm asking if you have reviewed
your investments against that database?
Yes, we have. You have? We have.
And are there any companies
that you're investing in directly
or indirectly that are on the database?
Well, that database itself forms part
of when we consider the potential exclusions.
Mm-hmm. It's range of a, a range of sources
that we can, we, we look at.
Sure. So that list itself in
and of itself is not automatically an exclusion.
No, I understand That. So, so the answer is yes, we do.
Yeah. Um, our ethical, uh, sorry,
our exclusion list is about 500 odd.
Yeah. This is available on our website. Yeah.
If there is a company which is not on the exclusion list,
then that is a, a company which is available for investment.
Now, as for the specifics,
I don't have all that detail at hand.
Okay. Well, so I can always come back to you on that. Could
You please get back and let us know? Yeah.
As you know, we, we got three
and a half to 4,000 securities at any point in time.
Sure. So the specifics I don't have, uh,
in front, so we'll, we'll record that
As a follow up. Yep. That
would be great. Cool.
Um, so, uh, Al also, there's been a lot
of international commentary
and a number of UN about, um, uh, weapons companies
and military technology companies who are supplying the, uh,
Israel Defense forces, um,
and the commission of alleged war crimes
and crimes against Humanity.
Um, and I just have,
have you done a screening over in the last 18 months
of those companies?
We are continuously screening companies,
and we've just gone through a review of the exclusion list.
If it is illegal and it does contravene, uh,
our ethical policy, it'll be an exclusion list.
But again, I have to come back to you on specific,
Could you please also specifically on that, um, also, um,
uh, in Myanmar, so a bit closer to home in Southeast Asia,
there's, um, well documented, um, crimes against humanity
and war crimes being committed against the,
uh, people of their country.
And I wondered if you have, um, looked at
and screened, uh, for companies
that you might be investing in directly
or indirectly that have been supplying military technology
to the Junta and Myanmar?
I don't have that detail at hand.
We've got seven managers, each
of which run the equity portfolio on their behalf Yep.
To, uh, global bond managers.
And the reason is that the nature
of these underlying investments can change day to day.
Sure. Now, as for us, a applying that specific country
and those issues, we work closely
with all the Crown Finance institutions
when we share information.
And from that perspective, we're, we, um, apply a policy
In that context, can we add that question to the list?
Absolute follow up. And, um, lastly, chair, um,
why don't you, uh, publish your portfolio in the way
that the Super fund does every six months?
Why don't you have the same level
of transparency that they do?
I, I'm, I don't know why we don't do that.
Would it not be a good idea? It's public money. We
Can, we can take that back and consider it.
I think that's more for an internal discussion about what
We do. Okay. Well,
um, I'm asking you to,
but I, I think it would be also great if you could add
to the list of questions mm-hmm.
A considered response about why you don't
publish your portfolio.
Okay. Camilla,
Um, my final question on the financial performance is, um,
we touched on earlier the judgment in the TN case
and the financial, uh, responsibility that a CC has in order
to meet, uh, the foster of that case.
And you said that that's, um, the direction that,
that you are continuing to go in to date.
Um, how have the, uh, payments
that have been made in relation to tn, uh,
how much have they been and how has that, uh,
measured up compared to your estimation, that outgoing cost?
Yep. Sorry, I was just going to pay for the number.
Um, so as of sort of last count, um,
we've paid about $82 million in loss
of potential earnings payments that,
that we believe are related to tn.
We can't be definitive.
We've got, um, just on 400 active claims.
Um, Stewart could come and give a more considered answer,
but, uh, my understanding is
that the actuarial valuation done at the end
of the financial year was still pretty consistent
with the 3.6 billion liability estimate
that we'd done the year before.
Yeah. So, um, if I could just say that the extra estimate
for the TN liability, um, at the end of last year,
or, um, June 32, 2025
was about 3.6 billion.
However, um, the liability went down
because, um, discount rates went up.
So, um, the underlying liability was pretty much identical
to the year before, but the liability went down
by circa 300 million.
So 3.6 became 3.3 thereabouts.
Um, Um, I'm gonna ask a final question in this part,
and then we're gonna take a break
and then we're gonna go to, uh, the next part.
Um, we've been
provided a graph, which I'm sure you've got a version of.
I'm not sure if it's exactly the same one.
Um, which is related to the movement
and liability, uh, from the previous valuation,
the 2024 to 2025.
Um, and it references, so mo
or two of the upward swings, um, uh, bridging from 24
to 25, uh, to do with modeling.
My, my question is, um, how long do you think it will be,
uh, before the actions that you are taking to reduce, um,
the time people are spending on long-term claims?
The cost of those claims will come into those, um,
long-term liability valuation calculations,
and we'll see a, a downward swing in
that liability as a result.
Uh, so hopefully quite soon.
Um, even in the first three months of this year, we,
we do the revaluation quarterly,
so we are seeing some green in those.
Um, that waterfall chart
that I think you're referring to, chair
Water, I call it a bridge.
So, um, I'm, I'm not quite sure the exact chart
that you're referring to, but I'll,
I'll talk more generally.
Um, so when in the chairs opening remarks, she,
um, outlined the fact that our aggregate deficit
for the year had declined from last year, 7.2 billion
to this year, 1.5 billion.
So on the face of it, quite a significant improvement.
Um, one of the biggest components of that was, um,
TN was booked last year, so, um, 3.66 billion last year.
Um, we are beginning to see, um, some stabilization,
um, in the level of, um,
growth in our outstanding claims liability.
And that has, um, flowed on into the beginning
of this financial year as, um, as our weekly compensation
growth and cost has slowed.
Um, so it's still growing,
but it is growing at a much slower rate.
Um, which in turn, um,
the in year cash costs will ultimately lead to, um,
a release in the, um, in, in the need for, um,
provisioning against our outstanding claims liability.
Um, but look, that's a very general answer.
The scheme has, um, a number
of different financial levers right through from, um,
injury prevention fees
and levies, um, claims, cost management,
health commissioning, corporate overheads, um,
investment performance, and asking scheme boundaries.
So there's, there's basically seven levers, all
of which impact on the overall financial
performance of a CC.
But I guess probably in summary, we we're beginning to see,
um, an improvement in, in terms of our in year,
um, nature performance. Yeah,
I mean the, there's, we've talked
before about the fact fact there's no one sort
of silver bullet to turn around a decade
of deteriorating performance,
but it's, it's all of those things.
And we are starting to see probably what need,
what were green shoots last time we were here,
a a sprouting a bit more into small bushes, um,
that are really encouraging,
but we've still got a long way to go.
And of course, the actuaries have an independent view of
what our performance is,
and they assess the outstanding claims liability
based on that view.
So we need to demonstrate a sustained return
to better performance so
that they'll factor it into their outstanding
claims actuarial assessment.
So I suppose the key here is that those small changes
and incremental changes have a significant multiplier
effect on the long term.
Can, they can, um, members, we,
we will take a 15 minute, um, break
and sit back down at five to three
and go straight into, um, up three.
Um, We are now going to part three, um,
members, which is the non-financial forms vacancy
in 24, 25
All about. Thank you.
Um, Mr.
Chair, I have a couple of, um, questions that I wanted
to ask in this section.
Um, one of, I think I might start with, um,
injury prevention and mm-hmm.
Yeah. Uh, so some questions
around, um,
injury prevention, a few questions around it.
And then I also wanted to look at the program. Mm-hmm.
So on the, uh, 2nd of September, um,
sorry, Brian, uh, you, uh, Madam ce, sorry,
you in this context, informal, um,
uh, put out a message to staff to indicate
that there would be focus on,
and so additionally, uh, less of a focus on equity.
So I wanted to look at those two areas separately.
Um, the first one was, um, I think maybe start
with injury prevention,
and we can maybe look at, um, equity
after that, which is also in this section
in its own heading as well.
Uh, what did you, and why, what did you mean,
and why did you say there would be less
of a focus on injury prevention by a CC?
Uh, so it was really about being clear with our people
About where, I guess almost
that discretionary effort had to go.
Um, uh, the culture review
and affinity review both called out
that our strategy was quite broad and aspirational.
So this was part of signaling how we need to
double down on that core role we have,
which is rehabilitation of injured agenda.
So, so it was really signaling where
the priority focus needed to be.
Um, regardless, we still have very clearly, um,
and importantly a legislative role in injury prevention
and in, um, addressing access to the scheme.
But it was, it was really around that
focusing in on the core of, um, our role.
Just got a few subs on that. Uh, so that's interesting.
I, I did notice in your annual review
that there is still a lot of information around, um,
injury prevention, and that that is still appears
to be quite a focus.
So what has, what has changed,
or what were you signaling to your workforce mm-hmm.
That has, that is now different in relation
to injury prevention compared to the approach that you,
that you had in the past?
Because you've said that it's still part of your strategy,
it's still there as a key part of your annual report.
So, so help me understand why you would make that type
of announcement to your workforce in that case.
So, so part of, part of that response is that,
as the chair said at the outset,
we'll soon be sharing our new strategy
with the organization.
So we haven't shared that yet, but that will call out and,
and signal a, a,
a relentless focus on good rehabilitation,
supporting people back to work in independence.
Um, so I don't wanna get ahead of that,
but, you know, in our previous strategy who are keen to,
we had very clear, we, we had one
of our three strategic goals around prevention
and one around equity.
So, so that is a shift for us.
Um, the, you know, the best thing we can do
as an organization is make sure
that we are delivering really good
rehabilitation for everyone.
Um, so, so we still have an injury prevention team.
Um, we still have the, the work we are doing.
Um, it's more around, you know, the amount
of time we will spend discussing, uh,
whether it's at the board
or the executive in terms of how much time we spend,
for example, talking about injury prevention, one
of the practical examples, I think one of the goals was
to integrate into prevention across the whole of a CC.
So on a practical level, we've decided not to do that
because the rest of the ACC is focusing on social rehab
and claims management.
So you might make decisions about
not expanding the work across
because of the priority areas of a CC.
Okay. Um, thank you. The, you still on? Yeah. Sorry.
This is one of, probably one of the major focuses
for this area, the, in the year,
in review review in June, 2025, you published a specific
piece of work on, on injury prevention.
And I understand in that you found that, um,
most injuries are preventable.
So given that, um,
and given that if ac if you were successful in an,
in in injury prevention,
you would significantly impact the future costs of a CC
and the financial, um, financial reserves
that you would've to put aside
and the sustainability of the scheme,
which we talked about in the previous section.
Why then would you choose then to, to have less
of a focus on injury prevention, given
that your own report has shown you
that most injuries are preventable?
I think, um, Jan talked about it, uh,
in our opening remarks as well.
What we know at the moment is
that we can't prevent injuries fast enough
or quick enough to help
with the sustainability of the scheme.
So for instance, you know, this last financial year,
we've prevented around 10,000 claims from injuries,
um, from occurring.
But when you have 2 million claims coming in,
it's not making, uh, enough of an impact
to help with the scheme.
What we do know is,
or to make a meaningful difference, we need to be aiming
for about a 5% reduction in New Year's claims cost.
So that is our ultimate goal.
Uh, and to put that into perspective,
that's about 120,000 claims.
So what we know now is that we need to shift the way,
what we are focusing, we need
to make some shifts within injury prevention to have more
of an impact on what we are doing.
And that includes, uh, using different levers
that we have available, the behavior change campaigns,
not just through the programs that we've been funding, um,
influencing the systems that we work in, um,
across the different priority areas.
So making much better use of the, um, levers that we had,
If follow up with that.
Yeah. So additionally, uh, in
recent, relatively recently,
I think it may have been in the previous year,
but it does impact on, on the year end review, um, it will,
a CC also removed, uh, quite a significant amount
of funding from WorkSafe in terms of entry prevention.
So forgive me,
but it appears that you've removed funding
from injury prevention.
You've stated that it's no longer going to be a priority,
and, um, it appears generally that
this new plan that you, that has yet to be released
or state that injury prevention is no longer gonna be a
significant amount of a CC as it currently is.
And I know that you haven't released that yet,
but it does appear a little bit
that a CC is giving up on injury prevention.
So we're not giving up on injury prevention.
As I say, our previous strategy had as one of three
strategic pillars, um, injury prevention, um, what,
and as, as Renee said, you know, we had a plan
to embed injury prevention across everything we did
as an organization, um, that isn't gonna be the best, um,
use of our effort.
So that what we're actually doing is creating a bit of space
for the injury prevention team within Renee's space
to almost reset itself
and think about how to have more system influence.
It's not nec, it's not simply about how much money we spend,
it's about where we can influence system improvement.
If you think about how injuries are preventable, um,
you know, it's a really complex space.
How do we get people to literally have a home
before they do something that's going to get them injured?
How do we get people to be more careful?
You know, we can't,
we can't wrap the country in cotton wool.
So we have to think about the different ways,
the different way, the different messages
that won't necessarily come through us,
but it's who we need to work with,
who can get those messages out.
So the team's working more through others.
So we've got good relationships with some
of the industry groups.
Some of those work, some don't.
So we need to understand what works, put more effort into
that, make some difficult decisions around things
that aren't working, um,
and really get more, more impact out
of the work the team does.
I think it's opposite. I think our goal is
to have more impact,
but we, we understand more about
where we have to make that impact.
We need to know, we need to have more discipline around it,
but we also need know now that it takes time.
So, um, and,
and that's within kind of, you know, our approach is to take
that time to make sure
that it is having an impact that we need.
Okay. I've got some subs over here.
Oh, yeah. Okay. So tiny stuff on, on this.
And then I might ask about,
which is an unru prevention program.
So the, the money that was removed by a CC from WorkSafe,
specifically in relation to injury prevention, where has
that money been repurposed into
and as, has that been repurposed into injury prevention?
Yeah, so, um, with the money that we were providing
to WorkSafe, it was not showing the having an impact on the,
on the work safe or in the workplace injury, so
that the funding came back into the pool.
We spent about a similar amount in our prevention approaches
in the workplace across the four major
priority systems that we're working in.
Okay. Um, yeah, so in your report, you have said
that the return investment, um,
in injury prevention increased,
but there are fewer injuries, um, uh, that were prevented,
uh, in, uh, 20 24, 20 25 than expected.
So it's a serious kind of injuries
that were prevented more than the kind of lower se uh,
uh, less serious injuries.
So one would imagine that, um, injuries that are of, uh,
lesser serious nature, uh,
easily preventable than the more serious kind of injuries.
Can you just explain this whole thing to us?
Like, uh, with the effort that you put in, um,
obviously the injuries happen at different places when
you're talking more serious versus less,
but if you could just explain that
to us, that would be really helpful.
Uh, well, we are guided by the, the act
and the legislation when we're investing, um, uh,
levy payers funding into initiatives.
Um, and we have to be quite confident that there's a,
it's cost effective
and that it will res result in fewer claims.
So, um, um, the,
The areas that we, and we prioritize our work
around the priority areas,
and sometimes that's sectors that have high volume,
but smaller claim volumes, say falls for example.
So you might have 800,000, um, falls happening,
but the averages, um, are $2,000 each compared to, um,
in the road, um, area, you might have 30,000 accidents,
but at $14,000 a claim.
Uh, so it varies across the different, um,
claims that we see.
And if we are doing an intervention
or focusing on what you can do in that sector, we, we take
that into consideration in terms of the reach
that we can get and how much you invest in it.
And largely our return on investment looks at, um, you know,
the reduction in claims.
So how much money we're investing are you putting in,
and what can you see with the
Claims Being reduced.
No, I understand that. What I'm trying
to understand here is that the serious nature
of injuries have dropped,
but the less serious nature,
that means they haven't dropped, um,
because you haven't been able to reach your expectation for,
uh, prevention of injuries.
So one would imagine that those kind of injuries are
of less serious nature are more easily preventable.
So your approach towards that, I do understand
that you've mentioned there are some priority
areas where you're focusing.
Yeah, so in that relation,
Yeah, I, I don't know if, if that's the case.
So, um, it could,
because in each of those different sectors, you can have
minor injuries plus more serious injuries.
So you can have falls that your report
Says concussion, your report says that, uh, the, um, the,
the, those prevented were in high risk areas
where injuries are generally more severe.
So it's your report that is saying
that more injuries were prevented in the high risk areas.
Okay. So what I'm saying is that
so high risk areas means there are severe injuries,
and if the injuries are not that severe, you would imagine
that they are easily preventable.
So that's the kind of question I asking.
I think the challenge there is if you think about, um, uh,
we've had a lot of growth in the rate
of gym related injuries.
And so I wouldn't say it's, there's an easy fix
for us in terms of how you reduce the number of gym injuries
where we've had real success and,
and the reason that the ROI is was higher,
but the number of claims was lower, was our young driver
and our motorbike rider programs have been really successful
in, in reducing the rates
of injuries in those groups of people.
If there was a similar thing we could do for gym injuries,
that would be fantastic.
Yeah. Or, you know, the accidents happening in the home.
So, so the team is doing some, some pilot work
with a few hundred home based people, um,
but they're almost, um, it's almost insidious the sort
of the rate of injuries in and around homes.
And so as we'd say most is, um,
if we could do a community service announcement,
it would be, um, to people at home to be careful,
particularly putting up Christmas decorations final up
and the pilot that you're doing, how do we know, uh,
how it's progressing and when do we find out?
Uh, uh, so, um, a probably next year, so we're,
we are just starting that work, so there'll be, um,
a request for, uh, proposals going out next time.
Okay. Thank
You, Mr. Chair. Uh,
so my question is about, um, the, some
of the access for Maori
and, um, so in the report there is a mention of, um,
it says strength that is also mentioned strengthening wrong
or, um, service provision.
Uh, does that strengthening mean, um, increased funding
for it, and is that what's driving, uh,
increased access for Maori?
So, um, basically is it being self-driven
by the providers, um, who are then
making the claims on behalf of people?
So the strengthening
of the service provision without seeing the specific
reference, um, we'll be referring to working
with the sector, um, to ensure that we've got good, um,
quality and,
and outcomes, um, information from the sector
and make sure that, uh, people are accessing, you know,
the right services for their needs.
Okay. So, um,
does the increase in slight increase in access for Maori, is
that correlated with an increase in claims through
Maori providers?
Nothing really. No. No.
Val, and then I got Mark. Thank you.
So just sticking with entry prevention,
I do have some follow up questions on,
as I flagged earlier. Um,
I wanted to talk about the program.
Um, you originally said that
the decision in relation
to phase two would be revisited in the 2026
or 27 financial year in relation to funding of that program.
Is that still correct? Mm-hmm.
Yep. We're still in the way. Yeah.
So, um, sexual violence prevention is still a
priority area for us.
We still spent spending, uh, prop between six
and $7 million this financial year on prevention initiatives
that range from community providers like Haier, uh, through
to workforce, um, initiatives and behavior change campaigns.
Um, but um, we paused the rollout of that particular program
so that we could re-look at everything
that we are doing in the sexual violence prevention space,
uh, take this, the, the year to reset, um,
ensure that working a lot.
We are, we are working alongside our, um,
other system players that work on, um, prevention as well.
So we are still doing that work this financial year.
So will you roll out any further delays in,
in re-looking at the phase two of,
Uh, we are aiming to have decisions made so we we can be,
have clarity before next financial year.
Okay. Well questions on that.
So firstly,
how effective is t in sexual violence prevention?
Um, my understanding is it's pretty good program.
Secondly, why was the pause, um, initiated so soon
after the after phase one of hick tea started?
I think the issue is we don't know
how successful the model so is going to be.
Um, we don't know the impact of that model.
The five providers had only just been onboarded in
November last year, so we wanted to, um, have the time
to make sure that it is the right model
and it's having an impact
before spreading that out, um,
more broadly across the sector.
Okay. Are you going to a new primary?
Um, Just give Mike one first.
No, I was gonna, um, ask more about, so
with the original plan, it was, I think
to have 16 organizations in 16 different areas.
And the moment I think we've got, what is it, five five?
Mm-hmm. Is the plan still to, um,
implement those 16 different providers in 16 different areas
or that, um, depend on, on decisions
that you still have to take
Decisions and plus availability about funding
for next financial year.
Um, just to mention on that point,
is it just about, um, funding
or is it about proving that the model works?
Yeah, both. Yeah. Impact as well as funding. Great.
Mike, thanks. Thanks JA
Couple of slightly different questions
around human resources.
Um, I was just looking at the annual report
and, uh, in the workforce
and um, there's a couple of things
that really stand out in, in there.
Um, the, um, gender pay gap is quite big at 18.8,
but then when you look at the all staff compared
to the tier one to three managers, it's I guess
could say quite disappointed when you look at the diversity,
how it suddenly jumps from 59% European across the
complete workforce to 84% European.
Um, and also the gender goes from 70% female down
to 41% when you go to
that top tier management three management levels.
So I'm just wondering what's is being done to, um,
I guess change this makeup of this, um, tier one
to three managers and also the medium, uh, gender pay gap?
Um, so starting with the gender pay gap, um, 70%
of our, um, workforce is female.
Um, and that's heavily, um,
do heavily dominates our client facing teams.
So we look at both the vertical gender pay gap, which
as you say is quite, quite large,
and also the horizontal pay gaps at each
level of the organization.
So, and I guess you gotta do things in sequence.
So the first thing we've focused on over the last few years
is, is balancing it at each level so that
whatever tier you are in the organization, it's um,
it's within plus or minus 3%.
Um, we've got a lot more work to do on the vertical pay gap
because technically from a, from a sort
of mathematical point of view, we'd, we'd need to get all
of our tiers throughout the organization to 70% female
to be able to bounce that out.
Um, and the other thing I would say is in those senior roles
in tier one to three, it is quite, um, point in time.
So for example,
we have a new chief clinical officer joining the executive
team in a couple of weeks
that will change the gender balance quite significantly
for the executive team.
Um, it, it does swing about a bit.
Um, the best thing we can do is help to, to get real
internal movement up through the organization.
We've got some leadership programs, we've got a, um,
a now well, well embedded, um, Maori leadership program
because we're quite underrepresented in senior roles
compared to our frontline roles for Maori.
So we've just gotta keep working on it. Yeah.
And it just stands out like gender
and diversity at the top level stands,
stands out from that report.
And the other thing, um, and,
and I guess when you look at the letter
of expectation from the minister is very clear around
cost reduction, um,
and looks like focus of that was around customers.
Um, but that also, did that also go across, I guess to um,
I guess senior staff remuneration?
Because when you look at the annual report again, um,
there's 2020 employees that got over, uh,
500,000.
I think the top got in excess of 1 million,
and I think the executive in total was about four,
over 4.6 million.
So is that being looked at as well as a way to reduce cost?
Um, so just to, to go to that table of remuneration.
So it's important to note
that those highest paid roles are our investments team.
And I think there's a note beneath the table
that calls that out.
They receive both the base pay
and an incentive, a performance based incentive.
So, so that makes up I think something like 10
of the 10 sort of top remunerated roles in the organization.
So when you park that the, it looks a bit different.
Um, in terms of, um,
the broader question about efficiency
and managing costs, I mean, we absolutely have an obligation
to run the organization as efficiently as we can.
We spoke last year about the six
and a half percent overhead cost
reduction that we delivered.
Um, we also reinvested some of
that in the 250 additional case managers.
We talked about earlier. So we think
that was a really good reinvestment.
Uh, yeah.
And, and I, I accept it as a difficult question to answer,
but do you see the four point excessive over $4.6 million
for the executive for the last, um,
financial year value for money?
Well, I do. Um, look,
we have to look at all aspects overhead.
Stuart called up the seven, seven leaders
and overheads as one of them, um, that we have to look at.
'cause it has direct impact on OCL.
At the same time, we are trying to,
um, tune the ship.
It's a big and complex ship, turn the ship around,
and we need people to do that.
So by definition, the 250 people all cost money.
And that goes to the, to the overhead line.
Um, so we have to balance up what we are trying to achieve
and how we do it, and the speed at which we do it.
So it's not off the table,
but at the moment we have, um, priorities
that are more important than focusing on, on
the overhead line.
It will be a focus. Yeah.
But it's, it's part of a, a planned.
Yeah. And there was significant, sorry, last time.
Yeah, yeah. And there was significant redundancies in the
last, um, financial years, which had also significant cost.
Is that ex, is it expected to be more
redundancies moving forward with?
Not that I'm aware of. No. We don't have any plans.
Um, supplementary to the point made around
The performance component, can you just
for the record, uh, make clear your view
of the ability to attract
and retain the talent you need in your investment team
to look after this very valuable
Tonga, um, for New Zealand,
Um, it is, I mean, obviously they do, we do have
to remunerate them because if they're good,
they are in demand.
Um, and that's why they have a, a different
remuneration structure than maybe the rest of a CC.
But we believe that that
remuneration structure allows us to keep the team
that delivers the returns that we are getting.
And you're right, it is a very important part of the scheme.
You know, 54 billion is one of the biggest schemes both here
and in Australia in terms of insurance, um,
investment portfolios. Mm.
But the independent review behind on this as well,
So We're well run investment organization,
we run low cost in some cases, half to a third of
what similar organizations have the size
and complexity will be.
So we have investment sprint policy that enable us, us
to track and retain, but it's something
that we need to always be mindful of.
We produced $4.4 billion last year.
About 250 million of that was purely due
to the people we hire.
So trying to keep that kind of, uh, you know, that kind
of value add in place is, is important to us.
And as I said, over 33 years, we've had 1.2%
of the 9.3% has been due to who we hired.
So it's an important part of why we've been successful.
We had an board investment committee strategy day a few
weeks ago, and that has been the core
for why we've been successful.
So remuneration is important to actually get the track, the,
the staff we need, the results they
produce are definitely value for money.
And, and so final stuff on that.
So the results achieved in the year under review,
in your view, have a direct correlation to your ability
to retrain and attract
and retain the investment team that you've got
and remuneration structure as a key part of that.
A absolutely. Without that, we wouldn't have,
have been able to produce the results we did.
Great, thank you. A minute
I wanna follow on from my questions that I asked
around the, the cutting of,
or the pausing of the program recently.
There's been another announcement in relation to the, uh,
the funding that is provided to Water Safety New Zealand,
which is a reduction
of one 1 million in water safety New Zealand
to actively prevent, um, d by drowning.
Um, could you, um,
let me know the reasons why you decided to cut that funding?
And also are there other programs that relate
to injury prevention, uh, that a CC has either,
um, stopped funding or is planning to, um, either stop
or reduce funding, um,
and that those decisions that
have, you know, been made to date?
So Renee can talk in a bit more detail,
but I, the, I would just say, um, in response
to your question, um, again, as stewards of the scheme,
we do need to make sure
that we're investing levy payers money well
in the things we need to do.
And we do have a requirement, legislatively,
to get a return on the investment from our
injury prevention activities.
And so, um, it's, it's incumbent on us
to regularly review those investments
and understand whether they're delivering, if they're not,
why not, and where we don't believe they can deliver, then,
you know, to make what are, you know, frankly,
some difficult decisions where, you know, these, um,
the reality is that there's a lot of trade-offs, um,
and choices that we need to make about
where we invest that money.
So mm-hmm. Renee, and just, yeah,
and just, um, carrying off that we, we, we do monitor
and track all the, the investments
and initiatives against claims that have been saved.
And we see, um, quite good, uh,
claims reductions in some sectors that we work in,
for instance, agriculture for forestry, um,
and sectors that have sports smart, uh, using sports smart,
um, in the dry in the ride program for motorcycles.
So we, we track those
and we are always making decisions against that
and monitoring the, those contracts.
Unfortunately, in the, um, situation of the water safe, um,
contract, we, we weren't seeing any measurable change in the
claims that we were receiving around, um, in, um,
drowning related incidents for, for all
Question on that. So
water, water safety New Zealand says
that they have in their modeling suggests
that they have re reduced, um, death
or injury by drowning by about 25% since say, thousand five.
Um, that seems pretty good considering the severity of, of
what happens usually in a drowning situation where, um,
you can either have, um, be okay
or have very serious injuries or,
or, um, sadly we do see a lot of death
by drowning in New Zealand for obvious, um, reasons.
That seems pretty good to me.
Um, why did you decide not to continue with that funding?
So we, we look at the claims saved.
So we monitor against claims
because that's the legislation, um,
requires us be cost effective looking at the claims
reduction so that it leads to live reduction.
Um, we can't see any investment in what,
where we were providing it against claims safe.
So the trends for, uh,
claims against drowning incidences have been trending
flat for a long time.
Um, and we just can't see the claims being
reduced from that investment.
Is that perhaps the fact though,
that when people are drowning,
they're not obviously gonna make an a c claim?
Because, you know, sadly they,
that's not the situation. Yes.
That, that's right. They might be saving
claims, but our role
To be prevented Our role in terms of using, uh,
levy payers funding is around the claims
and the injuries resulting in claims.
I think that might make people, I understand your answer.
Yeah. But I think that might make people that uncomfortable
that those are very serious injuries
and we wanna prevent them even though there
isn't a, a link there.
So, second part of my question was, um,
what other programs have been, um, stopped
or paused within the year in review in relation to injury
Prevention? Can, can I just go back
to injury, prevent, so
to water safety again,
because there are a number of,
of players in the water safety space that will work
with water safety New Zealand.
Um, we'll continue to support them
through our summer, have a hmm.
Safety hints, um, in other ways.
Um, and, and you know, the teams who worked quite closely
with water safety New Zealand
and the various other players in this space and,
and government also fund life, surf life saving Coast Guard
in the school curriculum as well.
So there is activity going in across the system.
Sorry, safety. Yeah. Uh, um, last financial year.
So we monitor, we monitor all our contracts
and our arrangements
and partnerships in, in terms
of the impacts that they're having.
So, um, a a number of times, it's a long term kind of goal,
so they might be funding this year,
but claims prevented in the as well.
So we are mon we are working with all, all, all our, um,
partners in terms of the, the performance of their,
um, contracts.
So in terms of which ones have been, um, stopped
or paused in terms of funding, we've gone through two.
What are, what are Yeah. Other programs
That's been, uh, I don't think there's any this financial
year, but there's definitely programs that we're working
with that aren't having as much impact as they could have.
So we're working with those providers,
and I think this is a theme, sorry, chair, sorry.
Far a theme. Whether it's across
what we invest in injury prevention, what we, what we spend
with our health providers, our own case management.
You know, hopefully what you get is a sense
that we are being very disciplined
and making sure that we are delivering value
for injured New Zealanders
and levy payers through what we do.
Um, you know, we, we can't fund everything everywhere
and we need to make sure that we're funding the things that,
uh, within our legislative remit and,
and helping, helping injured New Zealanders.
Can I ask a supplementary around
how you calculate your return on investment
from injury prevention?
Um, noting that it's gone up from $1.86
per dollar to 1.92 year to year.
Just interested in how that number's calculated.
If you can talk to us a little bit about
That. Uh, it from
a very simple, um, um, answer.
It's the money that you're putting in
and versus the claims that you are saving
and that's your return.
But there's a number of factors also that, um,
impact that figure.
So the cost of your claim, so it's an average.
So, uh, if your average, um, claim cost goes up
and you prevent more injuries, that's a better result.
So that's, um, the increase you'll see is
because the claims cost average goes up. So,
So you're, you're measuring claims in a sector pre
and post campaign?
Yeah, yeah, that's right.
So, and we track and evaluate what's happening and,
and make judgements about attribution.
And is there any particular reason that
accs non-competitive procurements for
above a hundred thousand dollars, um, over
that financial year, have a large portion of those con
or those, those services directly related
to injury prevention, um, activity? Mm-hmm.
So, for instance, there, if, if you talk, for example,
sports Smart and rugby, there's only one organization
that looks after New Zealand rugby, so
that's why they'll be in there.
So there's a lot of, uh, sector players that we work with
who are the only ones in that sector, for instance.
So it doesn't surprise me that we've got more that's
Pre-planned. Yep. That's not,
And we will, we follow the
procurement rules in that space.
Thank you. The primary,
Um, primary and then we'll move on after this one.
Oh, okay. Is that alright? Yeah.
So I wanted to ask about, um, equity.
Um, a CC has an equity problem in relation to the people
that it pays out with claims.
And I say that
because I've recently looked at your report
that you published in March of this year, which suggested
that, um, statistically speaking, fewer women,
Maori Pacific, Asian,
and disabled people received, uh,
money from AC sports didn't make claims
and didn't receive, um, funding in relation to those claims.
So there's clearly, as your own
evidence suggests an issue in relation to how a CC pays out,
uh, money, uh, which is collected from all BB payers,
which is, you know, everyone engaged in the workforce.
So with that in mind,
how is a CC going to address this, given
that we've already heard, um, from you, Megan, that, um,
there is gonna be less of a focus on equity from a CC?
Um, so what, so I agree.
We need to make sure that the scheme is fair
and accessible to everyone who's entitled to access it.
Um, and the numbers that, you know, that, that,
that you are talking about
indicate that that's not the case.
And, you know, we can make all sorts
of assumptions about why that might be,
but they're just assumptions.
Uh, so one of the big things that we're quite excited about
and probably a bit sad that we're excited about it, um,
is we've worked with Ministry of Health
to get a specific question into the New Zealand Health
survey, um, that will ask a question
to understand the prevalence of injury.
'cause what we know at the moment is how many people claim,
what we don't know is how many people are getting injured.
And so we're missing, if you like, the denominator.
So for the first time, once we have the survey
that I think goes out in June, um,
so we'll get the information this time next year,
we'll be able to compare that through the IDI
with our claims data
and get a much better picture of, um, uh,
by cutting, you know, New Zealand into,
so whether it's geographic or, or ethnicity
or other, um, indicators.
What are, where are those gaps
between people getting injured, um,
and people claiming from a CC.
So we can, for the first time, hopefully, um,
be more targeted and more deliberate about
how we then address in, um, you know,
and what you would've seen in the report.
Are there, you know, we know, um, rurality is a challenge.
Socioeconomic factors are a challenge, but,
but they're quite big things
and it's, you know, we need some,
some more specific ways of targeting.
So that's, that's one of the things. Mm-hmm.
And, um, we also know that, you know,
most people access the same, the scheme
through our mainstream services.
So our, um, areas of focus is how do we make
that mainstream available
and accessible to all New Zealanders?
And when we are doing work on social rehabilitation
or claims management, our goal is
to integrate equity approaches, right?
From the, the service design.
So it's integrated across when it's implemented, uh,
implemented and, you know, instead of adding it on
and topping it up and, uh, you know, and subsequently,
So what, what, my last question around the statement
that you made to staff, um, when we talked about injury, um,
prevention, your response was that it was focused to,
it was focused all over the organization
and your team is gonna be focusing on injury prevention.
So, but the response to this equity question as
as the opposite is that, right?
So rather than focusing in, in a particular team,
you are gonna be spreading
that equity focus throughout organization.
Is that correct? Yeah,
There's, there still is an equity and,
and, um, Maori focused roles across the organization
that are focusing on improving, you know, equity
and Maori outcomes across the organization so that,
that there is still teams across the organization.
So what did you mean when you said there would be less
of the focus on equity when you told all of your staff that?
Yeah, so, so again, it was around this, that sort
of strategic level focus.
Um, you know, it was one of it was, it was literally one
of our three strategic goals.
And so what it was signaling is, is this back
to the core of what we do.
And actually you're right in the core of what we do,
embedding access and,
and, um, fair, um, fair access to the scheme is,
is being embedded through new contracts
and new services rather than, than I guess growing as sort
of a central focus.
So, so it, it is in a way almost the opposite
of the approach for injury prevention.
Okay. Can you help, can you help me just understand what
that means on a practical level?
So what won't you be doing for equity in a CC
that you were previously
doing when your focus was different?
Well, I mean, I think one small thing is we had developed
essentially an equity action plan that was getting bigger
and bigger and bigger.
And so now what we are doing is, is pairing that back to
where are the areas where we really need to focus at the,
at the beginning, um, of an activity to make sure
that we make, we are making this particular service
accessible to more people.
And each every area would have, you know,
their own activities and plans.
What we're doing is integrating it more across the
organization to make sure that we are,
our work programs are focused them, uh,
focused on the right things and having the right impact.
I think the other thing you have to remember is
I don't think we have the data
to specifically answer some of the questions.
So we don't have the data to say, this is
how many people in those, um, designated populations,
whichever they are, are getting injured
and here's the ones that are making claims.
And is there a disconnect between those two?
So that's the first step.
We are not backing away from equity.
We think all New Zealanders should have equity, um,
equitable access and service to recover from injuries.
And if we are not servicing some populations,
then we need to address that.
But there is a prioritization that we have to have in order
to get basic services and support back online.
And that's what we are focusing on.
We are not giving up on injury prevention.
We are being more deliberate about value for money,
but we're not giving up on it.
We are not giving up on equity,
but we need to make sure that the basic services
are appropriate and can service all New Zealanders.
Correct. I I'm fine with,
um, moving on, moving.
I do have some questions around, um, so move to part four
and you can ask me next question.
Yeah. But just cus uh, kind of more
probably not case management 'cause we've discussed it,
but more of the kind of day-to-day.
So jump into part four and Yeah, yeah. Um, thank you.
Um, so I had some questions around some of the schemes
that are funded through a CC, uh, schemes programs
that are funded through a CC, which, uh, are
run by external organizations.
So an example is the accredited employer scheme. Mm-hmm.
Um, and there as I understand other external, uh, bodies
that, that are funded through a CC to provide some
of the service to what work or find some people who ended.
Um, one of those is the, um, a scheme
that you have in place where, uh, decisions are reviewed
and there is a review in place to have reviewers, um,
contracted to, uh, external organization in order
to check if decisions have been made.
And there's been some controversy around the, those reviews
and how, um, individualized they have been.
So I wanted to ask about those programs whether you have
been, as you have seem to be reviewing, um,
some areas in relation to injury prevention
and equity, have you also been reviewing these schemes
and are there any changes that you will be announcing
or have made in relation to some of those provision
of services by external organizations?
You're talking about navigation services
where we support people who want
to review the a CC decisions?
Yeah, yeah, I am,
but I also just specifically in relation to the, the, yeah,
so part of the navigation topic
that reviews those decisions,
but more broadly, I mean, it might be external provision
that I'm not aware of, that you may want
to the committee know that you have reviewed
or changed to have done your navigation
Steps. A couple of
things, you raised several questions in there.
So if we start with a EP,
so we'll go in the alphabetical order.
So, um, um, you, you raised the accredited employer program.
So look, that was established, as you might know, in,
in statute in 2000
and just in the last 12 months, we've made, um, some
of the most significant changes
to the program in its in its history.
Um, so there are about a hundred, well,
483 business entities that are part
of that, part of that program.
Uh, which is all about, uh, allowing larger employees
to manage their employees claims for work related injuries.
So the changes that we've made in the last, uh,
12 months following advice to the minister, uh,
were changes, which were really about
increasing the threshold.
So the expectations of those employers in terms of
how they go about, uh, you know, helping employees back
to back to work, it's still very early on, uh, in terms
of those, those changes.
Uh, but, but yes, we're paying pretty close attention
and we expect to be in a position in the early part
of next year where there'll be some more data available
for us to understand, you know, just, just
how those accredited employees are doing.
Now in terms of, um,
how those accredited employees go about managing claims,
many of them use third party administrators, so, so TPAs,
um, and in some cases a CC has a small number
of contracts directly with those TPAs
to manage the non-work related injuries for some
of those accredited employers.
So that's the a EP space.
Yeah. So what are the specific, so you said that you,
there may be some changes, so I, as I understand it, each
of the accredited employers,
I think you said there are 483 have a,
an individual contract with a CC to provide those services.
So are the changes going to be changes to those contracts
with those accredited employers, or are there other
Yes. So what, what, what,
what I, what I, you, what I'm referring
to changes to the requirements of those employers
for their continued participation in
the program. So those, so it has
Changed the Contracts so that were,
those changes were ged, um, toward the back end
of last year, and they were given effect in
the early part of this year.
So those new standards are in place
for accredited employers.
And so CC'S role is now to monitor the performance
of accredited employees against those, those new standards.
And what have you found for this?
Well, I mean, I guess, I guess one headline would be that
as you would expect, we didn't drop
standards, we increased them.
And so a number of employers have found it a little more
difficult to meet the standard,
and that's what, that's what you would expect.
Um, so that's one of the
headlines that we've, that we've found.
But like I said, we've been collecting the data
for a relatively short period of time, so we expect
to be in a position to have something more
to say about that next year.
And would that mean that there would be a reduction?
Would you be canceling the contracts for some
of those accredited employers if they weren't able
to meet the new G standard?
Uh, look, I mean, ultimately we wanna work
constructively with employers.
We share the same ambition as they do, right?
Which is to prevent injuries
and then to help people to recover
when those injuries occur.
Um, so, you know, we where, uh,
an employer doesn't necessarily meet the standard,
we will work with them because again,
these are new standards
And it's, it's really important,
I think Megan mentioned in her comments,
if we can keep people connected to workplace,
they're far more likely to be re rehabilitated more quickly
and get back to work more quickly if the employer is working
with them and doing alternate duties, et cetera.
And, um, the team have been looking at pilot programs
where they're working with specific employers to,
um, proactively run that sort program
where they keep the employees in work in alternate duties
while they're injured and while
they're getting rehabilitated.
Mm-hmm. You said that, um, a CC
and employers have the same objectives
with the accredit schemes.
Is that always correct though?
Because aren't there some employers who make a profit
through running their accredited employer scheme as opposed
to a CC and then paying out in the north way
and isn't because of that?
Isn't there an incentive for them to, uh, not pay out
as much money or support the employee as much
as a CC would in order to decrease the amount of money
that they have to be spent?
Potentially, but you could also argue that
that employer might have an even greater incentive
to Jan's point, um, to get that employee back to work.
So, um, the, the, the new framework
that's being gazed does give us more performance information
to be able to monitor.
And as Michael says, you know, in a year's time,
we'll have a full year's worth of that data.
Um, and in the meantime, you know, we're, we're just in a,
we're in a better position to work
with the accredited employers,
but, um, you know, I I think generally speaking,
we all wanna get people ated.
Thanks. Have you got a new primary?
Um, no, I was just one final one on, so just,
I did have some more questions,
but I'm hoping to, it's slightly different subject.
Um, just on the re reviewing tool, which we didn't, um, get
to, but, um, just on the accredited employer scheme, um,
when they, uh, when they are treating
their employees in the same way that a CC would trade,
treat a client, are you, will you be able
to assess whether the amount of support is comparable
to someone in an accredited employer scheme compared
with someone who's, um, just being treated
by the general, a CCC scheme?
Yeah, that's a great question
and we can come back to you on the detail of that
And we will capture that.
Thank you. Um, so changing tack a little bit,
this part is about how a CC delivers an efficient, capable,
and resilient organization going forward.
And you mentioned earlier the
263, um, frontline roles
that got, um, uh, uh, supported
through the reprioritization of funding, um, and,
and savings you found last year.
Can you just talk a little bit about how that, um, relates
to capacity efficiency, capability building looking forward?
Yeah, abs, absolutely.
So, um, through the change process last year,
as we've talked about, um, we, I, you know, we were able
to release some headroom to enable reinvestment effectively.
Uh, and you know,
what at the time was 250 additional frontline roles,
case managers at that particular point in time in order
that we could have a, you know, a a greater number
of people working in dedicated teams,
supporting those long term claims for clients back to work
and to independence.
And, you know, as far as the extent to which
that's contributing to an efficient
and effective organization, I think we would say that
that is showing up in our results.
So return to work rates are improved, uh, across the board,
whether that's 28 days, 10 weeks, nine months, or one year.
Those rates are all improving the long term
claims for growth rate.
I think in our report we reported at about 8.7, uh,
this morning it's at 3.2%.
Right. Um, which we haven't seen since 2017.
Uh, and, you know, let's get to the heart of the at,
at the reality of that is we are helping people back to work
and independence.
That's good for them, it's good for their families,
it's good for, it's good for New Zealand,
and it's also a really important part of ensuring
that the scheme is around and sustainable for our kids, uh,
and, and our grandkids.
Before I ask my next up,
just give us those two numbers again.
So down to 3.2, 3.2%
Growth rate. Um,
so at, at, at its peak it was 15.3% in the early part
of this year, and I think we reported 8.7% at the end
of 30 June, which is the year in review.
So just going back to then the reprioritization 18 months
ago when you sat around this committee talking about this
year that we are now reflecting on, there was a lot
of questions and concern raised by members about the fact
that the government had said, go
and have a look at how you're running your organization.
Can you just reflect on any other, uh,
positive outcomes like the one that you've just shared
that have come from that focus on value
for money spent?
I think generally, um, it was an important signal
for us as an organization, um, that we need
to be making those trade-offs and reprioritization.
So, so to me that was probably the most important thing.
We can't do everything,
but we have to do the things that are most important
and they're the things that are the most important now into
the future, not necessarily two years ago
or three years ago, or 10 years ago.
Uh, and we've continued to do that.
You know, we've, um, a, you know, a a bit of a spoiler alert
to the end of the year, you know, we've,
we've made a commitment to,
despite the pressure on the scheme to do everything we can
to come in on our operating budget this year.
So that requires us to have further trade off conversations,
um, around how to, how
to best invest our money during the year.
So, so that discipline is really
important, generally speaking.
Um, I think specifically
the reinvestment into the frontline,
that apart from giving us the ability to deliver
for those clients also was a strong signal that the rest
of us are here to support, support the frontline
to deliver for clients.
Uh, and that's a really important message for me, uh,
for the organization to get.
We've got a long way to go, um, and, you know,
and a lot more work to do.
Um, but, but you know, it's good to be able to sit here and,
and talk about the progress.
And so just again, in terms of, uh, talking about
focusing on being a more, um, effective,
sustainable organization, one
of the other concerns 18 months ago when we were sitting
here and we're talking about the year ahead, was that, that
that would lead to a mass exodus, uh, or,
or reduction in headcount.
Now, am I correct in my understanding
that the headcount year on year has, uh, gone to a total
or was at a total of 4,459 odd, um,
and in the year that we're now reflecting on is 4,685 odd,
so in other words, year to year, there was actually a,
a net increase in head count in your organization
that came from that focus on, um,
where you were spending money.
Yeah, we've certainly, we've certainly increased our head
count over the last period of time,
and it's been in, in a very direct response to the need
to help more people back to work in independence.
And if you, and if, if you look at the mix
of FTE across our organization,
you've certainly seen a greater proportion of, um,
of investment into our customer frontline,
and less of an investment into some
of our supporting and enabling functions.
But to Megan's point, there are only two kinds of people
that we employ at a CC.
There are those folks working directly with clients,
and then there are those folks supporting
and enabling those people who are working with clients.
Um, are
Those doing investments
And Oh, and those enabling them
into Yeah, to pay for them. That's right.
And those making sure you can spend the money.
So final question on that front.
Um, are there any indicators,
so we've talked a lot about some really positive
indicators that are tracking.
Are there any indicators, um, that you are concerned about
as a result of those changing?
I think our 13 week numbers are
looking pretty good, aren't they?
So our run rates are looking good on all
of the, the metrics.
Yeah, I think the, the, the chairs.
The chairs absolutely right.
The thing that I suppose I spend a bit
of time thinking about, and we spend quite a bit
of time talking about, we are seeing a significant
increase in the number of review
applications that we receive.
So as we talked about earlier, um, any, uh,
injured New Zealander that receives a suspension letter
or an adverse decision letter from us has
the right to review that.
We think that's really important.
Um, we are, we are seeing, uh,
you quite a significant increase in the number of reviews.
What's really, uh, comforting
and important, uh, is
that decision quality appears to be holding.
So that is of reviews that go all the way through
to a full review hearing.
We're still seeing about three quarters of them, 73, 70 4%
of those, um, you know, being, uh, found in accs favor.
So that's really important.
Uh, but as I say, um, as our really talented
and committed people are working hard every day
to help New Zealanders back to work in independence,
one decision at a time, it really is important
that we maintain public trust
and confidence in, in, in the way we do that.
So that's something that we're,
we're paying close attention to,
But, but, but there are still areas
that we need to look at, um, things like,
um, procurement
and whether we work more closely with people like P
or Health New Zealand on getting a better deal for a CC
through the buying power of New Zealand,
um, health services.
So the team are working with both those organizations to see
how we can join up on procurement, um,
of medical devices and et cetera.
So that's about the next sort of next stage of
that's the next, yeah.
Great. So we are not just sitting here
saying, yes, tick the box.
We are, we are doing well on that, so we can stop.
There's always more.
And, and if I could have one too, I'd say the,
the other thing that we do spend quite a bit of time, um,
being mindful of is the pressure on our people.
Um, we've done a lot of
what we've done in the last 12 months
through our people going the extra mile, those convers,
it's, it's literally one conversation at a time, excuse me.
And we need to make sure that we are supporting them
with better tools, better, better access to good,
helpful information.
Some of the things we talked about earlier, so
that our really experienced clinical folks aren't spending
70% of their time t trawling through PDFs to make sense
of a 20 year clinical history of a complex, um, client's,
um, story, uh, to make it easier for our people to be able
to do the right thing for clients' more often, um,
rather than, you know, just, just, you know, um,
them feeling more pressure.
So that's really important as well into the future.
It's why we've got a work stream around
how we actually are future proof, what we're doing.
And, and so that's important as well. Great.
Thank you. Um, probably followed on from, um,
the questions you're answering around the review.
So the independent complaints review authority, um,
is contracted
by a CCI think you contract two independent
companies to undertake that work.
And that's, as you're saying for when people want a review
of the decision this year, there was, uh,
some controversy around whether the quality of those reviews
and whether though they were being independently made in
relation to people's specific cases.
Yep. Since those l
and i, I know that you've res you responded to media at
that time since that occurred,
what have you undertaken this year in terms of making sure
that, uh, those reviews are firstly independent
and of, of a high quality that
that New Zealanders would expect?
Yeah, so, uh, you're right.
We cont we contract two independent dispute resolution
providers, fairway resolution and, and, uh, ICRA.
Um, we, we continue not to have any evidence
that has been brought to our attention that,
that we think substantiates the view
that there are templated decisions being made
for, for clients.
Um, we continue to work closely
with both of those organizations.
Section 1 37 through 1 39
of the Accident Compensation Act makes really clear
that we do have to engage those providers.
It is our responsibility to be part of the process for
how it is that they're selected and how it's that they work.
Um, and we, and we continue to do that.
I think one of the, one of the concerns
that was raised was the extent
to which there were templated paragraphs
that were being populated into, into letters.
Um, that is a, that is a very common process.
That is not, that does not mean to say that, uh,
that there are templated decisions being made to, you know,
sort of group disit, you know, kind of clients
or have reviews overturned against them.
So that, that's just not how, how it works.
You can understand how people may feel uncomfortable when
they receive a, a review decision
and someone else with a different
concern has received paragraphs
that may be substantively identical though,
and how that may raise concerns for them.
So did you, in terms of when,
and you know, that you had, I said, you said
that it hasn't been substantiated.
What steps did you take in order to, um,
reach that conclusion?
I think this is quite an important question,
so we'll come back to you on the detail of that.
Okay. We'll record that. Thank you, mark. Thank you.
It, similar lines,
so I just wanna get the, the numbers right.
So the, the growth rate of the, um,
long term claims policy down to 3.2 set,
That's an annualized growth rate. Correct.
And is that a case of more, um,
more going out or, or less coming?
Both. It's pretty, pretty easy.
Yeah. So we've, we've been very
focused on doing two things.
So our integrated recovery team works really hard
with clients in the long term claims pool to help them back
to work in independence.
And our supported recovery team works really hard
with those clients who are pre 3, 6, 5 days
to help them back to work at Independence
before they cross over into the long-term claims pool.
There'll also be some great work being done
by our partnered recovery team.
So, so, because there are some seriously injured clients in
the long-term claims pool as well.
Uh, and those folks also do return to work, um,
and independence, though they might continue
to access a range of other support from.
Okay. And so as the, the growth rate has gone down,
you've seen the review challenges going up?
Yeah, so, um, several things as the,
as the long-term claims pool growth rate has come,
has come down, we have seen review applications increase,
um, more broadly we've been, uh, you know,
issuing more adverse decision letters than we
have done previously.
And that's just a product of more case managers working
directly with, with the clients.
And the, the review of those, um, review of that,
what percentage have favored the, the customer?
Yeah, so it's a, so I can step through that.
So of all the reviews, if I,
if I think about reviews in the last 12 months, um,
about 40% of them were resolved
through early dispute resolution.
So that's internally with an a c,
about another 35% were resolved once that
that review had gone to an independent third party.
Um, and then of the sort of 20, 25% that are left that go
through to a full review hearing, um, uh, you know, sort
of three, three courses of those are found in accs
fail. So we look at
All 25% though, are found in favor of the,
Of those that go through to full review.
Are you happy with that, that you are?
Look, I'm, I think what that tells me is
that our people get it right most of the time,
25% Finish.
What it also says to me is they don't get it
right all of the time.
And, and so we are a learning organization
and where we do get it wrong, you know, in those instances
where a review is overturned in the client's
favor, three things happen.
The client's, um, entitlement is reinstated.
Uh, in many cases the entitlement is backdated to the date
that it was suspended.
And thirdly, in many instances
and quite right, we have a grumpy client that we, that that,
that we need to help, you know, back to,
you know, to independence.
So there are incentives for us, uh, you know,
to encourage our people to be making poor decisions.
And, and as I say, 75% of, uh, of reviews that go through
to full review hearing that have found an accs favor.
That's, you know, we're not uncomfortable with that,
but of course, we wanna be making sure
that our people are making the
best decisions they possibly can.
Okay. We're gonna move to the final part, um,
for general questions, current events,
and we'll give you a few minutes at the end
for some, including remarks.
I have questions around, um, two current events.
Um, and I'll ask the questions
and then if you wanna answer them,
um, then that will be great.
Otherwise, I understand that they are, they're related
to on matters that, that, uh,
current events, but are ongoing.
So the first is in relation to the strike action
that accs had this year, um, significant strike action.
Thousands of over a thousand workers are taking strike
action in relation to terms and conditions.
Some of, um, whom are saying
that they're not earning much more than the minimum wage.
Um, appreciate your obligations in good faith,
and as a employment lawyer, I'm aware of that.
Any comment that you wanted to make over the progress
of being able to settle that dispute?
Yep. Um, simply that we're continuing to, to
negotiate in good faith with the PSA look at, you know,
and it, it is, um, it is, um, the, the reality that,
that some of our people felt the need to strike,
and we completely respect that.
I do just wanna clarify, it was misreported the number.
So we have about 1300 of our staff who are members
of the PSA, um,
and of those about 750 chose to, to join
that full day strike.
And we absolutely support their, their right to do so.
Hopefully an update, um, from you soon on that.
The other question I wanted to ask was, in relation
to this issue around working at home,
as I understand there was a change, um, that was implemented
through your policy, which is now being challenged
by the Public Service Association.
Um, obviously I'm not sure of the status of that,
but I wanted to give you an opportunity to, to comment on
that, um, challenge as well.
Yeah, so we, uh, in response to the, the PSA challenge
and feedback from our people, we,
we put a pause on any changes and we went back out
and conducted a full consultation with our people, um,
that closed a few days ago.
So we're in the process of working
through our staff's feedback
before we, um, make any decisions.
And just for, for those of us who maybe not aware
of the exact detail of it, was it, um, a, a change
that limited the amount of time
that people could work from home?
Yeah, it would've been, um, a change to the number of days
that people are required
to work in the office versus away from the office.
Okay. Sounds, hopefully you have a update in due course.
Yes. Yeah, And,
and I should also mention that that was, um, part
of the action from the culture review, that in order
to build the culture within the organization needed the
social interaction and the, the actual, uh, joining
of the teams in the office.
Um, and I think that the, um, proposal is
that people work three days in the office.
So in that, um, environment, I imagine, um,
in the culture review, uh, a number of those organizations,
um, would've had a lot
to say about the need to improve culture.
And then when you implement the recommendations, uh,
are advocating essentially against the implementation
of those recommendations as an employer, uh, and,
and trying to be good leaders
and good stewards of the culture in your organization,
which we've heard for the last couple of hours,
that must put you in a pretty difficult situation.
Um, interested in how you navigate that.
It's, um, it is difficult.
Culture's difficult, um,
and it's a little bit like risk in an organization.
And risk is everybody's business culture is actually
everybody's business as well.
And it's not just how leaders at the top front up,
it's actually how people all the way
through the organization front up
and being willing to, um, contribute to
a respectful, but a high performing organization.
Um, so, you know, you can read lots of studies on,
you can't dictate a culture, a culture, you can't, um,
process a culture.
It is a quite a organic thing
that has to develop.
And what we are kind of committed to is living
and acting the values that the people have actually, um,
formulated and demonstrating that we
will live those values as well
as expecting people to live the values.
Alright, Camilla, I look forward to seeing the outcome of
that and hopefully they give you the chance
to actually do your job and shifting that culture.
Um, any concluding questions?
Just, um, you might wanna reflect on it in your concluding
comments, but just with, um, you, Jan
and your role as chair.
Um, just maybe reflecting on, um,
how you see your role within a CC
and any particular change of approach
that you personally will be bringing to, to your job.
Well, um, maybe a good segue, handover to you
for some, including remarks.
Wow, that's quite the challenge, isn't it?
Um, I, I see my role as, in a way,
as being conductor of the orchestra.
We have people that are very talented within
the organization.
We have people that are talented within the board,
and it's really bringing that diversity of skills
and capabilities to the organization,
but focusing us on things that make a difference, um,
for the next three years and then the next three years
after that, which was part of the reason that, um,
the review said the 10 year strategy, while aspirational
was a little bit too big
and too long for people to get a grip of.
So clarity trans, uh, transparency
and accountability are sort of the things that I expect
of myself and the organization.
I think we've made, sorry.
I think we've made good progress over the last
18, 24 months.
These things take time to work through the system.
This is not a quick fix,
but we do need to start on the journey
and we'll iterate as the journey goes through,
but being very clear about what the outcome should be.
Thank you. Thank, do I make any concluding?
I couldn't say it any better than my chair.
Well, look, thank you very much, um, to you
and your team, uh, for coming and joining us today.
Thank you to all of, uh, your team across the country
for the work they do for New Zealanders.
We very much appreciate it.
Thank you. Okay.
Um, members, we have a, um, schedule.
Welcome minister. Very quiet, diligently waiting.
Thank you. Good afternoon tea as well.
Feel free to take one.
Not sure that I need it, but thank you. Provided.
Have you guys been here since early this morning?
Oh, no, we came after 12. Oh, okay.
Um, thank you. Yes, please. Thank you.
Okay. Um, minister,
we have half an hour with you this afternoon.
Um, happy to give you the opportunity of make some brief,
um, introductory remarks
and then, um, we'll go to questions if that's okay. Thank
You very much. Uh, Mr.
Chair and committee members, thank you for,
uh, making time available.
I have got some introductory remarks.
I intend to, um, keep them far more, uh, brief than, um,
uh, others would want me to make.
So I don't want to go too far, um, into the detail.
I'm happy to answer questions at the end of it.
But look, um, a CC remains a fundamental foundational
part of what it is to be a Kiwi.
Uh, and it's an entity that I think is far too important
to allow to, um, uh, become unsustainable, uh,
either financially or more importantly in uh, terms
of the individuals that a CC supports.
And ultimately, at its essence, a CC is, uh,
a social insurance scheme.
It works really well for New Zealand
and New Zealanders almost all of the time.
Uh, and, uh, I'm determined to make sure that, uh,
in association with the board chair and the chief executive
and her team, uh, that it continues to do that.
Um, uh, you will have heard from Megan
and Jan, uh, earlier in the afternoon.
I've got some folks here from mb.
Um, but I want to just spend a minute
or two talking about, uh, why
and how a CC is not currently performing
as well as it should.
Uh, and as a result of that, uh, performance not being
as good as it should, it's not achieving
what I think individual New Zealands, uh,
need it to achieve.
Part of the issue is that accs costs have, um, ballooned,
uh, accs costs have increased significantly faster
and, uh, at a more highly than, for instance, the rate
of economic inflation across the
countryside over the last few years.
And as members around the table will know
that that's actually been quite high.
But accs rate of increased cost has even been more so, um,
the outstanding claims liability, uh, group, uh,
a liability, which, uh, estimates the future cost
of existing claims currently covered by a CC, so
that's currently covered, has reached $65 billion,
$65 billion.
That's a very, uh, big and significant number.
And sometimes we tend to gloss over the quantum
and the size of the numbers.
So, um, without any change, that projected figure is,
uh, is likely to increase to $78.3 billion
by the 28, 29 year very large numbers
and heading in what I think is the wrong direction.
So what's that issue?
Well, nearly two thirds
of the more than 24,000 New Zealanders in
that long term claims pool.
So those are people who have been receiving a CC, uh,
support for longer than 12 months, have
non-serious injuries.
And those non-serious injuries are things, um, as,
and I'm not discounting them,
but they in medical terms, are relatively simple compared
with, you know, more serious things.
So things like strains
and sprains, fractures and dislocations.
Uh, now, uh, if, uh, two thirds of that 24,000 of people
who are, who are on a scheme for more than 12 months
because of a strain
or a sprain, then I think that's not serving them well,
and it's not serving the, uh, scheme well.
And I think that we can
and must do better, uh, for New Zealanders, uh, in terms of,
uh, uh, quicker, uh, um, return to independence.
So I think that with the right changes,
we can ensure supportive
and successful journey back to return to work independence.
And that needs to be at the forefront of accs, uh,
decision making in terms of how
and, uh, when they, uh, assist New Zealanders
who are making those recoveries.
So, um, there are a couple of other matters
that I think we'll probably cover in terms
of some questioning,
but I want to just acknowledge, uh, to my right,
the new chair, Jan Dawson.
Jan, um, has, uh, been recently appointed
to chair the board, and of course, uh, Megan, Maine,
uh, the chief executive.
So Jan will shortly deliver the government's, uh,
expectations, including measurable improvements in client
outcomes and in terms of accs financial stability.
And, uh, Jan will do that, uh, as a result
of the, um, letter of expectation that the Minister
of Finance and I have recently written to her
as board chair, uh, and for the board to, uh, implement
and report back to us as soon as possible.
Um, the other matter I wanted to raise just at this by way
of introduction was, um, I, I've received, uh, uh,
a little while ago, the report from now finity were the, um,
group that were tasked by my predecessor to do a review
of accs operational performance.
Um, uh, the report has not yet been released,
but will be very shortly.
Um, but I can share with the committee that the key finding
of the affinity report is essentially that, um, a CC needs
to get back to basics,
and the basics of the a CC scheme were set out in this
document, which was the original.
So Owen Woodhouse chaired, uh,
Royal Commission into a CC from 1967, and if you go through
and read it, as I have done, it sets out the foundations of
what a CC, uh, was meant to do.
Uh, society has changed a bit since 1967,
so I'm not suggesting that we need to go back to 1967,
but the basic premise of a CC was relatively simple.
Um, and I think it wouldn't hurt, uh, many of us to go back
and, uh, look at the very basics of that scheme.
Part of the basis of the scheme,
which we don't talk enough about, in my view, is
that it is a no fault, no litigation scheme.
Now, we, we don't talk about the benefits of no fault,
no litigation very much these days.
So, Mr. Chair, there are several other matters that I,
that I would like to raise,
but, uh, in, um, uh, essence, uh,
that's probably enough from me at the outset.
Uh, happy to, uh, take questions, uh, uh, from members.
Great. Thank you. Uh, welcome minister. Welcome back.
Uh, you put out a press release on the 1st of October
outlining many similar concerns to what you've just
outlined in your opening comments saying
that you will shortly be releasing a
turnaround plan for acc. Where is it?
It's sitting with the board chair, as I've just indicated.
Um, uh, the Minister of Finance
and I have written a, a new letter
of expectation to the board chair.
Uh, and I think it's worth just explaining
to the committee about the, the timetable and what have you.
Um, members will remember that the then chair, uh, Dr.
Tracy Batten resigned.
Um, uh,
I can't remember the exact, do you remember the month?
Megan? May, may, I think. Something like that.
Uh, she had family matters that she needed to attend to.
So we had a couple of months, uh, of an interim chair, uh,
with David Hunt, the deputy chair, uh,
came up and took that job.
Um, and then we went through a process to appoint, uh,
a new chair, uh, that has now been done.
So Jan, who was on the board has now been appointed chair.
So that, um, that process, um, I'm, you know, I'm happy to,
to admit, slowed things down a wee bit.
Uh, but we've now got the new letter of expectation,
which sets out the government's, uh, uh,
expectations in terms of performance, uh, uh,
financial stability, but most importantly what it means
for individual New Zealanders who are, uh, clients of a CC.
So I'm expecting, um, that Jan
and the board will have that letter
or a response to that letter back, um, tomorrow.
Oh, tomorrow. That's very timely.
I was gonna say probably a week tomorrow is
to say, it comes to me.
It comes to me. Okay.
Uh, yeah, we look forward to receiving it,
but yeah, it would be good to see that, considering it was
Be, I'm very keen to see it too released
October. I'm
keen to see it too, Which is sometime
after the s resignation.
Anyway, my, my next question is, in May this year, you said
that a CC might not be the right place
to support those with sensitive claims.
What is your view on this now?
Well, um, uh, I referred to this document earlier on and,
and the, in 1967, there was almost no mention
of what we now call sensitive claims.
In fact, in 1967, there was, uh,
practically no mention indeed.
I, uh, when I read this some months ago,
I don't think there was any mention of, um, uh, uh,
mental health issues as well.
So since 1967, some things have changed.
Um, and we have in New Zealand, um, uh, we're fortunate,
I think, to have an a CC scheme
that is nationwide comprehensive covers all New Zealanders.
So, um, the issue that I was, uh, referring to then was
how does a CC best, um, uh, operationalize, adapt,
and adopt to changing societal circumstances that, uh, uh,
required these days to address issues?
That, to be blunt, the scheme probably was never, uh,
envisaged to, to cope with.
But a CCI think now does a pretty good job, uh, of, uh,
addressing those sorts of issues.
So that was really the kind of point that I was getting
to when I made those comments.
Just a sub supplementary on that, I mean,
goes without saying that societal awareness around the, um,
injuries that are incurred through, um, sexual abuse
and the mental injuries as well,
has increased exponentially since, um,
the Onward House report.
Uh, it seemed to me with that response
that you were not committing to a CC continuing to
support, uh, sensitive claims in the way that it is by,
by referencing the schemes origins.
Is that the correct interpretation of your
Comment? No, no. That's not the correct
interpretation at all. Okay.
And if that, if that is the interpretation that you've, um,
taken from it, then it's the, the wrong interpretation.
So you commit to a CC continuing to support,
um, those with sets sort of claims.
A A CC has a, has a, a comprehensive, um, team
of really skilled, capable professionals who I think do
remarkable work, uh, working with, uh, um,
uh, sensitive claim clients.
Uh, each of those sensitive claim clients has a set
of circumstances that are challenging, uh, mostly
for the client, I have to say.
Uh, and each one is, uh, you know, there's,
there's not a cookie cutter approach to 'em.
Each one will be different,
each circumstance will be different.
And, uh, uh, what I've been able to see in my time
as minister from some of the people that are working
with those sensitive claim clients, frankly,
I've been really impressed with their, their empathy,
with their sensitivity,
and with their professionalism in terms of the way
that they address, uh,
and work with those, uh, sensitive claim clients.
Tim Van? Yeah. Thanks, minister.
Look, appreciate you coming in this afternoon
and your initial comments as well.
Uh, fascinating to see the original copy there
that you have from, it's good read. It's a photo a
Few years ago. Well, it's a,
it's a, it's a, yeah,
It's a, well, yes, a copy of the original not
Parliamentary library will provide you
Copy of the original non read.
Yeah. Yes, that's
Right. The language, uh,
it's not only the, um, context
that's changed, but the actual language.
Um, yes. Some of the, the, the flowery language that, uh,
is used, uh, uh, in this document is,
is language that we wouldn't use today,
I imagine. So look,
I was just interested in your comments
around the lack of, uh, reference in that document
to the mental health and the, um, sensitive claims piece.
And I just wonder if you could give in the light
of the questioning, we're having some insight into the scale
of that now being covered under a CC.
Um, well, actually probably Megan might be best placed
to give you a sense of the quantum, of the number
of sensitive claim cases
that are on accs books at the moment.
Yeah, I think, um, we've got something like 25,000
sensitive claims clients at the moment.
Um, and that number is increasing year on year, both,
unfortunately because of the prevalence, but fortunately
because people are coming forward, we're saying
it takes an average of 16 years for a client to come forward
and seek treatment after their abuse.
Um, so we'd also like that time to reduce
as people become more comfortable coming forward.
And do you have any view on whether that is reducing?
Uh, I wouldn't, I don't know the answer to that,
but if we take that as a question, if you come back
with an answer to whether we're seeing them reduce,
Did you, oh. Um,
in the year under review,
the long term claims reduction, um, has,
has long term the people receiving, um, uh, income support
through long term claims has reduced by about 8,000,
around 20% of that significant reduction.
Uh, is this because of your letter
of expectations instructing a CC to reduce claims?
No, I think it's probably
because A CC, uh, uh, focused on trying to do the very best
for New Zealanders that look, um, what we know through, um,
very good medical
and um, uh, accepted, uh, uh,
knowledge is that the longer someone is off work,
the harder it is for them to get back into work.
And if you're off work for a sprained ankle, say,
and you've been off work for longer than 12 months, uh,
that's a really bad outcome for the person primarily.
Uh, but it's also a really bad outcome for, uh,
the employer of that person.
And it's a really bad outcome for the scheme,
and it's a really bad outcome for us as New Zealanders.
So a CC, uh, doing, I think now a very good job on, um,
encouraging, uh, uh, quicker, faster interventions, uh,
and not just leaving people, um, in a sort
of a, a holding pattern.
Uh, they, they are, um, one of, one of the things
that a CC has done that I've been, uh, impressed with is
that they've gone back to a, a case mass manager model.
Um, now, uh, back during, do you remember what year it was?
They did away with the case management? 2019? 2019.
They actually did away with case managers.
Um, and it meant that, uh, if you were an a CC client
and you needed to talk to someone about your case,
you rang an oh 800 number or sent an email.
I'm not, and I can remember getting complaints
as a constituent MP from people said,
I don't have a case manager
and I don't have anyone that I can talk to anymore.
I just have to talk to the person who answered the phone.
That system, um,
I think it's now widely accepted, didn't work.
Uh, and we've returned now to a case manager model with, um,
more than 250 case managers employed. I think what's
Additional, 200 more than 250 additional case managers
employed, uh, the, um,
so those people are now managing cases.
They're managing individual clients in a way
that had not been done for a number of years.
Uh, and the result of that is, is
that more people are returning to independence more quickly.
That's a great win for those people, those individuals.
It's a great win for their employers,
and it's a great win for the scheme
and us as New Zealanders. I'm
Just gonna ask a very quick stop on that.
Of those 250, do you know how many
of them have been employed in regional offices such
as the Wonderful office in the Nu Electric?
I, Um, I don't, I don't know
that off the top of my head.
Um, I would say though that the vast majority
of them will be in various regions.
I don't know exactly how many are in Nu, um, but,
but our, our staff are spread across the country.
I had to ask, But that was one of, that was one
of the benefits of having regionalized case managers
because those, so for instance, if, um,
in the beautiful electorate of Cora Mandel,
if you had a case manager in teams, um, that would, that
that case manager would have known, the local employers,
would've known the local service providers may well have
known the family or indeed the, the client personally.
Um, and may well have been able to provide a far more, uh,
um, uh,
localized knowledgeable response than literally someone
sitting in a cubicle answering an oh 800 number.
Uh, just supplementary to, to that answer,
when I asked you, I think in the previous hearing at this
study, uh, about your letter of expectations
and how that would be implemented, you indicated that the,
the way that you could reduce claimants without changing
entitlements would be to, through the focus
on an injury prevention.
Um, we've heard today, um, from your chief executive
that there will be less of a focus, uh, on injury prevention
through a CC and her and her message to staff.
Can you explain to me how these two statements
or approaches are compatible? Yeah.
Um, quite easily. Um, a c spends a lot
of money on injury prevention.
Some of it doesn't prevent injuries.
Uh, not all of it, but some of it doesn't.
So, one, one of the things that a CC is doing, uh,
which I'm thrilled about, is they're actually assessing, uh,
those in injury prevention schemes, uh,
and programs for effectiveness for outcomes are,
are the schemes that are being funded,
are they actually reducing injuries?
And in some cases, uh, they've found that those, uh,
schemes, uh, those programs are, are, are being funded year
after year after year with no demonstrable
reduction in accident numbers.
Um, and so my sense as minister, uh,
and I, I actually can't tell a CC what to do.
It's an a, an independent Crown entity.
But what I can do is ask questions
and say, is this money that you are spending on prevention?
Is it getting a result? Are you actually
preventing accidents?
Uh, can we measure it? And we are, we are.
You can measure it. I mean, there's a very good scheme.
Um, again, some of us that have, uh, rural
constituencies will know Farm Strong, for instance.
Mm-hmm. A really good program that is getting
excellent results, tangible results in terms of providing
physical and mental, um, health, uh, benefits
to people working in rural, uh,
situations on farms and so forth.
They're getting up great results.
So I'm, um, I'm looking, uh, keenly at, uh, programs like
that, but where there are programs that money is going into
and they aren't able to demonstrate those results, well then
I think accs Right.
To ask a question about that.
Just a supplementary on that.
An example that we discussed in our, um,
hearing earlier today, uh, that maybe fits
that criteria was the Water Safety New Zealand program.
Yeah. That has, um,
this year received a reduction in funding
of 1.1 million, correct.
Uh, that focuses on preventing drownings.
And the evidence suggests that they've reduced the number
of drownings since 2005 by about 20, um, 25%.
Yeah. Now, that doesn't have a clear link to fame reduction
and the nature of the injury that it's preventing.
Correct. So are you comfortable with that decision
and other dis decisions that a c might be making
that may not fit into that reducing claims?
Yes. Um, square, but obviously extremely important for
New Zealand. Yes. Yes,
indeed.
So a CC needs
to work within its legislative, uh, parameters.
Um, and as, um, important
as water safety education is, um,
one would argue potentially that that's not, uh,
within the purview of a CC.
Now, that's not a call for me to make,
but it's a, that's a decision for a CC, uh, people
to make in terms of where they place
that funding and, and where they don't.
Um, Megan, you might like to,
have you already answered a
question like that earlier in the day? Did you, we,
We've already had, So I would defer
to the chief executive in the board
chair's, uh, answer on that.
Ji, you've got a question. Thank
You. Uh, so, um,
that, um, uh, information about, um,
having more case managers is really a positive thing,
but on the other hand, what, uh,
we hear is the long-term sustainability
of PCCs under pressure.
So you just mentioned about looking at the cost
effectiveness of some schemes to prevent mm-hmm.
Are there like other things which are being looked at so
that we know that whatever is being spent it is
effective? Yeah,
Look, that's a, an extremely good question.
Uh, Dr. Palmer, um, one of the things
that I would like a CC to explore, uh,
and it's, um, in the letter, the new ex letter
of expectation, is I think
that there are potential benefits in terms of,
uh, procurement.
Uh, for instance, um, uh, could there be alignment
with Health New Zealand's procurement of equipment,
for instance, uh, A CC
and Health New Zealand, uh, both are in the marketplace for,
say, wheelchairs or, um, uh, equipment
that someone might use if they are, um,
injured or incapacitated.
Uh, and I, I think that there is a potential for a greater,
uh, cross government, uh, alignment of procurement.
Uh, that's something that I would like a CC to, to explore.
Um, and it just seems to me that that's an opportunity that,
um, is, is worth asking some questions about.
That's idea. Uh, the, I'm not sure what,
what the results might be, but
I think it's worth at least asking.
Yeah. Asking the question. Thank you.
About those sorts of things.
We've talked a little bit about, um, sensitive claims.
One of the ways of, and the cost
of sensitive claims in terms of the a CC scheme, one
of the ways of, uh, preventing, uh, those types of claims is
through prevention programs like, um,
the program piggy tier, that a CC, um, partly funds.
Will you be supportive of implementing phase two of
that program if it proves
to be successful at preventing sexual violence?
Well, that's a decision ultimately for a CC people
to make, um, uh, ministers don't make those decisions.
Uh, and I'm happy
and confident to leave those decisions
to a CC Frank, to be frank.
They have a better knowledge
and understanding, uh, of the programs
and also the outcomes of the programs that than I do.
That's what they, um, that's what, that's their, their job
to make those sorts of assessments.
So, um, I'm, um, happy to defer to the judgment of, uh,
the chief executive and our team or matters of that sort.
Right. Um, just a quick supple on that.
So if the decision of, um, the a CC chair or board
or decision makers within the organization was to continue
to support that, or that it was effecti supportive of that
as much, understand it's not your decision,
but you do have a role in overseeing a CC?
Yeah. Well, as I say, I, I think it's probably, um,
there are a lot of schemes that, uh,
or I keep calling them schemes.
It's the, the scheme is the scheme. A CC is the scheme.
They're programs, and I'm sorry I,
I'm using the wrong terminology,
but the, there are multiple programs that a CC fund, uh,
what I want to see from a CC is that the programs
that are funded get the results
that they say that they will achieve.
Um, and there have been some, uh, programs
that have been funded in some cases for years,
multiple years, that simply don't produce the result that,
um, the, the, the, the program, um, promoters,
uh, uh, say that they'll produce.
And, uh, as far as I'm concerned, it seems, you know,
I think one of the prime criteria for, for h the a CC board
and the, uh, chief executive
and their respective teams is to get, um, uh,
programs supported that are going to get positive results.
And if they're not getting a result,
then I would rather the money be spent on a program
that is getting a result,
Man. Yeah.
Thanks, minister. And you know,
I think you've almost captured it.
The, at the end, what I'm hearing is it seems
to be a consistent theme around wanting to ensure
that you are testing
and adjusting throughout, rather than a set
and forget model that across might be advocating
for in terms of it's not, yeah.
Making sure that actually we are respond,
as you mentioned at the start,
around a significant evolution in the scheme over time.
Mm. Such as mental health
and sensitive claims, where prevention programs would never
have been a part of what a CC do.
So it seems to me that you're saying instead,
actually we need to have a higher level of responsiveness
to the, to adapt to a changing need
to constantly reassess and check whether
or not that investment is getting the maximum possible
return in the context of always competing priorities
for, uh, investment.
And make sure that we are driving efficiency evolution
of the service for clients. Yeah.
And, and, and be contestable be just, just
because one group
or one organization has a a a program in place, doesn't mean
that there are potentially other, other programs
that may have, uh, uh, the potential for a better result.
So, um, I'm not of the view that just
because a CC has funded a program once, twice, three times
or four times, that that is then a green light for
that never to be questioned.
And for it just to be, um, maintained without,
without review, without investigation,
and without, uh, an insight into the, the results.
Um, I had an opportunity, uh, relatively recently
to visit Australia, Canberra, and Sydney.
And I think, um, uh, Mr.
Vander Mole, one of the things
that became immediately apparent to me is that we should be
grateful for the system that we have.
Uh, it's, it's, it's not perfect, but by crikey.
Um, we don't have different schemes for different, uh, jobs
or professions in different states
that are different results.
And, you know, if you break your leg in Queensland,
you're gonna get a different result if it's,
you break your leg in New South Wales,
and if you are a, um, if you are a, um, truck driver,
you get a different result than if you are a police officer.
Um, you know, at least our scheme is, um, comprehensive,
nationwide, uh, accessible for all.
And not withstanding that it has some challenges,
it's still an incredibly good scheme.
And the, um, vision
and foresight of the Sir Owen Woodhouse Royal Commission,
uh, has withstood the test of time.
Does that mean it doesn't need tweaking
and changing from time to time?
Of course it does. But those should be, um, uh, uh,
tweaks and changes that are designed
to improve the scheme in a way that provides better outcomes
for individual New Zealanders when they
have an accident or injured.
Right. A question around the three significant reviews
that have taken place, um, at a CC this year.
Uh, I'm interested to know the steps that you have taken
as minister to ensure that a CC is properly addressing, um,
the concerns that were raised in those reviews,
and specifically, 'cause we are short
of time the cultural review. Yeah. So your steps as
Minister. Yes. So, um,
uh,
the cultural review was a board instigated review.
The, the previous, uh, chair, Dr.
Tracy Batten, and her board instituted that review.
It came on the back of a number of relatively high profile,
um, uh, senior management, uh, issues.
Uh, I was pleased to see as a result of the, uh, re the,
the review, um, the cultural review
that the chief executive, uh, accepted all
of the recommendations.
And one of the things that I have asked a c, c
to do via the, via the board
or I've, I've asked questions of the board, is
what are you doing in terms of monitoring the outcomes
and changes for, um, the, as a result of the,
um, cultural review?
I don't know, Jan, if you have got any comment on,
on that that you'd like to make?
Um, no. I explained to the committee
before that, um, it's fundamental part
of the turnaround plan, and it'll be monitored
and oversight seen by the board.
It's more your steps as minister.
So I've heard from basic.
So that's, that's the, the, you know, um, my role
as minister is to liaise with the board chair and the board,
and then the board, uh, uh, has a relationship
with the chief executive and the senior management team.
There are nearly 5,000 people employed by a CC.
It's a big entity.
It's a big entity with lots of moving parts, lots
of different people doing, um, uh, as far
as I can see, really good work.
And I've had, uh, as I mentioned earlier, Mr.
Chair, an opportunity to visit now, uh, a number
of the a CC sites.
And I've been truly impressed with the caliber of the, uh,
people that are working there
and the difficult decisions that they have to make,
not just on a daily basis, but multiple times a day.
They, they are making decisions
that impact on people's lives and their work experiences,
and they do it in a, in a way that, um, as far
as I can see is, um, professional, empathetic, um,
and always has the best interest of the client, uh, at heart
By way of, uh, some concluding remarks.
Uh, be interested in whether
or not you want to add any comment to
feedback we had from the leadership of a CC earlier today
around the fact that last year's, uh, focus on, um,
financial spend
and how to spend money wisely had resulted in a number
of positive outcomes for a CC, uh,
in the measures of success.
And just any thoughts from you as the minister in terms
of the government's focus on
how a CC was spending money last year
and how it's actually transpired
through the year under review? Well, um,
Uh, each of those, uh, nearly 5,000 people at a CC
has a responsibility for the money that they are, um,
spending or investing on behalf of, of the clients of a CC.
That money has to come from somewhere.
Uh, and in accs case, it comes from, uh, levy payments,
which have been increased recently, uh, and
or, um, taxpayers.
So the Minister of Finance has, uh,
an unlimited liability in terms of funding a, CC, uh,
that's why we have Abigail X.
Um, it's because, um, that is a, a priority.
The, uh, finance minister can't just say, oh, no,
we're not gonna fund a CC this year, or We're not, or, or,
or whatever that is.
That is an obligation that she has, um,
any finance minister has.
So, uh, the focus on getting, um, value for money,
and that's why, for instance, um, I'm very keen
to have a look at, uh, procurement, um, uh, schemes
and, uh, opportunities for better,
more efficient procurement of equipment and services.
Uh, I think that's a good indication of
where a CC has potential to provide better dollar value
for both levy payers and indeed to the taxpayer.
Thank you very much,
minister, for joining us this afternoon.
Thanks again to the team from a CC and from mb.
Um, and I'm sure we'll see you all again soon.
You will do. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you members.
Welcome Jane. Welcome Sean, uh, welcome to Education
and Workforce for your, um, first I think official, um,
meeting with us, uh, the
charter school agency.
We've got an hour with you, um, this evening.
We'll give you an opportunity to get some opening remarks
and then open it up for question.
Uh, thank you everyone.
If I can introduce Juliette, um, Hayes, who is our head
of performance, and Dwayne Mcg Gibbon,
who is our head of strategy.
And, uh, just, um, for the awareness of the committee,
this is my last act mm-hmm.
As the chief executive of the charter school agency.
Um, technically I finished my role about 10 minutes ago.
Oh, no. Um, so, um, it's now on my time.
Excellent. And I would have to say
that I'm probably the first person in history
to attend Select military, uh,
select committee on a voluntary basis.
Uh, sorry. I look forward to sharing the, uh, successes
and achievements for the charter school agency.
Uh, just to give you some background,
my role was the establishment chief executive,
and I was tasked with establishing the agency, uh, in
and opening schools in term, um, one of this year.
I started my role in July, uh, 2025, um,
the 15th of July to be accurate.
And as a result, we have, uh,
schools opened in an agency established, um,
you are most welcome to answer any questions,
and if I can't answer them,
I will refer them to my colleagues.
Right. Um, Lawrence, oh, sorry. Sorry.
We'll, agenda. No, no, you
Go. Oh,
Kilda. Thank you very much.
Um, so just looking at what the agency's, um,
strategic priorities are, one of them was, uh,
supporting effective and robust authorization.
Recently, the Bangers Trust put forward a charter school bid
for Calton, uh, boys High that caused ongoing
and prolonged stress for the community
and the school, uh, despite that application.
Since having been withdrawn,
are there any learnings from the recent Calton Boys High
school attempted charter school conversion
that the agency is now applying to the, for decision
for state school charter school conversions, um,
under Section 2 1 12 F of the education
and training bill, uh, as you will see that a, um, sponsor
and a community member can make an advocation
to become a charter school.
That was the case, uh, when relation to calton, um, Cal.
Uh, what, um, we do do as an authorization board
that the authorization board must undertake a thorough
consultation process as part of that.
And part of that, uh, learning is to ensure
that we capture all of the, um, views
of the community.
Uh, and we will continue to do that as part of, part
of the act is ensure that, uh,
there is support from the community which Calton, uh,
sponsor could demonstrate that they had at that time
during the interview process supplementary.
So, I mean, in this situation,
the Bingers Trust allegedly attempted
to infiltrate the school board of trustees via the election,
so as to influence the, uh,
charter school conversion decision.
Is this a danger the agency had
or is now taking into consideration with the processes
and decision making around the conversion
of state schools to charter schools?
Just to clarify, our job is
to support the application process as the authorization, um,
board's job to approve applications.
Uh, they approve those applications against the education
training bill and the criteria that was set.
So is that something that you, in your supporting role,
became aware of the authorization board having knowledge
of and dealing with?
So our job in relation to that is providing the information
to the authorization board around the application process.
And during the application process, Kelsey could demonstrate
that they had support from parts of their community,
which the authorization Board took into account,
um, the next process.
And that, um, step was
to undertake their own due diligence and consultation.
And that is one of the, um, stop measures to ensure
that there is full community backing.
Uh, if there isn't full community backing, it is very
unlikely that the authorization board would approve an
applicant to, um, to contracting how is, um, full, uh,
community backing determined.
So as you will see in the act
that the authorization board must undertake consultation
with community, it must undertake consultation
with the board, and it must undertake consultation
with the students.
Uh, that would've been the case.
So just in terms of that, we know that, uh,
there was a person associated with the trust, so not on the,
Sorry, we need
to ask questions about the strategic intent.
Yep. Uh, from that period, not about a specific case.
So I've let that run for a while.
So let's lift it up, uh,
and take it back to the year in review
or strategic intent issues since, uh,
the period closed. Sure.
So how many other bids has the agency received, um,
for charter school conversions from state schools?
So, in relation to that, we have, um, currently had, um,
excuse me, I just need to refer to my notes.
So we have had currently, um,
we had 78 new applications we received.
Of those 35 new squad schools in 2024, um,
of, of 12 of those new schools, eight schools were opened.
Um, in relation to your question,
there have been 16 formal expressions of interest from, um,
converting schools, state schools, converting.
Yeah. And can you state statement based? Sure.
And can you provide an assurance
that other state schools won't experience the type
of pressure that we saw, uh,
Calton Boys High School experience?
Oh, and, and answer to that question, that is a po
that is a legislation setting, as you can see,
and as part of the act that a sponsor, uh,
with the community, community member can make an
application, just in terms of the agency's,
um, strategic priorities.
I mean, one of them is growing the charter school network
to offer choice and flexibility,
but we've seen in this very recent case,
that pressure exerted on state schools, um,
do you alert the Ministry
of Education about schools like House
and Boys who, um, have had bids made by private groups
to take over their schools.
Uh, that's part of the consultation process
and part of the author authorization boards process in
seeking the views of the Ministry of Education
and the Education Review Office.
So they do that, not use it directly.
And do you, but do you track that in terms of, I mean,
you have a supporting role, a role to grow,
so I'm just trying to understand your role versus their
role, uh, in all of this process.
So in relation to the process around conversions, uh,
the school will make,
or the sponsor makes an application, uh,
school in line with the act.
Uh, as part of that application process,
the authorization board seeks the views of the community,
uh, of the, the community
and the, um, ministry of Education as part
of the application process.
I'm gonna start from Lawrence.
Yeah, thank you, chair. Just a couple subs.
I think on this sort of converting school angle,
you are absolutely right that, you know,
section 1, 2, 1 5 I believe is quite clear,
but do you see that setting?
Now we've seen instances where one person can do that.
Do you see that setting for converting school is too low?
That's not something I can answer. That is policy setting.
I, I, I, our job is to actually implement policy setting,
and in this case, a community member, uh, made a application
to the authorization board. Okay.
Um, I have two questions regarding hold. I'm sorry.
Supplementary. Yes. Okay. Um, just on the, okay.
Because then the context, uh, we don't get to
have any scrutiny with authorization board.
And, you know, in terms of the supporting role that you play
to the authorization board, this is the best, um,
the most appropriate time for it.
Just in terms of not so much converting,
but looking at new ones, what sort of advice did you provide
to the authorization board?
When the authorization board, um, signed a contract
with a Nonexisting charitable Trust,
namely the New Zealand Performance Academy,
Otero Charitable Trust?
Can you clarify that, that question for me?
So essentially the authorization board approved the new
academy, but that charitable process sponsor doesn't exist?
Yeah. So when the authorization board approved the, um,
answer for, uh, contracting, uh, there was an error
through the contracting process
where the trust changed its name.
So it was an administrative error.
Um, therefore we, we contracted with an entity
that did not exist, um,
because they had changed their name partway through,
which was, um, which we picked up.
And as a result, um, we checked, um, our processes.
Um, we have fairly strong robust processes around that.
Uh, and we have since put in further, um, robust processes
around due diligence and ensuring that, um, the age, the
contracting sponsor is actually the sponsor all the way
through the contract process.
So from our per perspective, it was administrative error
that wasn't raised, but we acknowledged that there was one.
Thank you. Um, and just on one of the, some of the schools
that was opened the beginning of the year,
this is my last supplementary, uh,
application process chair.
Um, there were two language, uh,
French language immersion programs that was in Ram in Kodo.
Um, what sort of feedback
or guidance did you sought from the Agiles Peron,
from se uh, LA
or A EFE, who is the French board
that approves all
accredited French language academies globally?
So, uh, in relation to the application, um,
the authorization board seeks information on the, um,
value in need of the network,
and they will, um, they look at what the applicant has done
with sponsor potential response has done to ensure
that there is, um, a need for them in the network.
No, but that's in, was the French agency who's responsible
for all global French immersion programs, were they?
Or did you check if they have
for the right accreditation when this, the charter schools
Question for the authorization board got a palm
Question fine with new one.
Yep. So thank you.
So the purpose of having charter schools is
to provide options, and so there needs to be interest.
So very keen to understand what kind
of interest you're seeing from parents wanting
to enroll their children in charter schools,
and kind of overall how the enrollment is changed.
So, um, as you will be aware, we have had, um, close
to 130 applicants applications over the,
um, two years.
Am I correct in that? Um,
and what we are seeing in relation to appearance, um,
are wanting something different for their children,
which is the, um, which it, it's is the,
and the ideology that sits behind charter schools.
Uh, so from what we have seen, um, there is a,
there is a need or that from a parent's perspective, uh,
for something different for their children to, um,
access in the way of education.
And the feedback that we've had from some of these parents,
um, has been, um, around, uh, potent rates of attendance,
uh, children seeing themselves as capable
and confident learners, um,
and, um, having attended school, um,
more than they have in the past is the, um, data
that we, we have at the moment.
Thank you. Does that answer your question? Yeah,
It does. Thank you, Vanessa.
Uh, thank you very
Much. Yeah. Um, obviously
Quite a huge undertaking to, um, build a, um,
organization from scratch in such a
short amount of time. So
Can you us through some Of the major risks
and challenges that you have faced during that process?
And what are the things you needed to do
to overcome some of those?
So, um, one of the, the risks is, um,
the fact that we are charter school, how,
how charter schools are perceived in the education network
is one of, is a risk that we've had to overcome.
Uh, we've overcome that risk by stepping into, um, unions
and, and discussing the purpose of charter schools
and revisiting, uh, that, uh,
the other challenges have been, um, as you will know, uh,
the agency was established, uh, on July.
In July. It had no enabling legislation.
Uh, I worked into an agency with three other people,
and there was the expectation
that you will have schools opened.
Um, so, uh, we worked at, at speed,
but also ensuring, um, oh,
there was an application process underway when I walked,
walked in to the door, uh, we only, we made sure
that we had, um, around the application process,
audit New Zealand sit in the room
and watch us undertake that process so that we were, um,
working within the framework
that we needed to, to work within.
Um, as you know, it takes two years
to actually open the school.
We, we did that in six months.
If there is some learning from that,
there will always be learning.
And that is how do you support the sponsor?
Uh, how do you provide, um, the back,
the back office when you've got a staff
16 to do that.
So yes, we have some learnings
and those are around what will we look like going forward,
uh, what to be put in place to, um, continue to put in place
and review around our practices, around approval
and our contracting.
Thank you. Thank you, Hilda.
Um, so I just have some questions around the number of, um,
students attending charter schools.
Yes. Um, do you have that information
for each of the schools?
Well, yes, we do. However, um, the information, um,
has been, um, not released
to allow those schools to establish.
But what we can tell you in September, 2025, uh,
we have 427 students in the network
across Harvard schools, across eight.
And, but you know, are there some with very large numbers
and some with very small?
Like what, what's the range?
What's, what's the highest and the lowest?
Well, we have a range of, of schools,
I'm not asking the name of the school.
We have schools that have, um, a range of, um, in
between 30 right through to over a hundred students.
Um, and what we see, um, 'cause we do collect attendance
and enrollment data, what we can see is a trajectory
of increased roles.
So those schools, um, will be meeting their,
their roles that they, um,
proposed in 2025.
At the end of this year, most of those schools will be at,
if not, or will be at their establishment roles.
And will they, will that information for each
of the schools then be publicly available since they have
then had that opportunity that won't, um,
compromise their commercial viability, um,
I think was the reason it was given as
to why the information was being withheld.
So when will the public get to know this information?
So performance data will be available next year,
and that will include what their, their enrollments are
as part of example, annual annual review.
Annual reporting. Thank you. And so,
So, so just, uh, very keen
to understand when you report on performance, um, uh,
especially in regards to educational achievement, uh,
how does this compare with, uh, like how the performance
of state schools reported?
So can you provide if there is any difference?
Um, so just to be clear, it was agreed that, um,
charter schools would use, um, would report a
after one year of establishment in relation
to achievement and progress.
Um, and that will be able to be compared against, uh, state,
state integrated schools.
Um, however, what we do know, we have collected interim data
and what we can see from that interim data is that
most students have made sufficient rates of progress
and in some cases accelerated rates of progress.
Would you like to add to that?
Um, the main thing to know is that
although the information isn't made publicly available yet,
that we are monitoring school's, uh, achievement
and progress and attendance.
So, uh, we know that schools have got systems in place, uh,
and that they are using the achievement information
and attendance information to make plans for improvement
for students who need that in real time.
So there is no difference in reporting.
It would be, we can compare it,
no difference in reporting state
schools versus charter schools.
So, um, to ensure that there is a comparison, uh,
between charter schools
and state schools, the assessment tools that are used, uh,
across, um, are being used in state state schools as well.
So, um, and we al we also have the same levels.
We also have the same targets, yeah.
As, as state schools in relation to achievement.
Great. Thank you. I'll Giving you alliance to his
Sub. Just
Do it and then I'll come back to you
For Yeah. A quick sub,
and this ties into what pji is asking.
Let's say for example, for attendance.
Can you, uh, can you compare apples to apples
between a state and state
integrated school and charter schools?
Are they using the same benchmark
In terms of Yes. Sorry.
I are. Okay,
Great. That's all. Thank you.
Great. Sure. That's helpful.
Uh, well, mine's kind of the same,
but I recall when my, uh, children went
to high school when they were tested
by a Canterbury University test they did
to assess them in high school, which bo were no resemblance
to their primary school reports.
Uh, it was okay and those kind.
But when I spoke to the principal at the high school,
he said, well, the, the reports are meaningless
because they don't say anything.
Uh, and some kids that are supposed to be at, um,
reading at their age level are illiterate basic, um,
when they arrive at school.
So while they're using the same metrics, which is
what you've just said, uh, are those metrics,
have they improved in the last 10 years?
I mean, is it, is it any, is that, is it a, a
recognized test that I know you're using the same ones
that the, um, state schools are doing,
but as far as I know, they're not all work that much mm-hmm.
In response to i I that
that would be a wider system question to, to ask.
Um, that's not something that the charter school agency
can ask what we, what we do do, and can assure you and,
and parents in the community that we use the same testing,
um, and to, um, ascertain achievement levels than,
uh, state and state integrated schools.
And we have the same expectations around meeting targets
through their contracts.
The assessment tool that you're referring to is not one
of the ones that we are, that is, is set
as one of the performance measure
Tools. The university
can universal?
No, no, we use nationally reference tests like Pats
and Thank you.
Um, just one on the performance one
and then, um,
back on my numbers one that I was asking earlier.
Um, well,
what happens if a charter school doesn't meet those targets
and will they, will they be given the whole year to do that?
Um, or are you, uh,
doing interim measurements along the way?
So we collect the data twice yearly.
So, uh, as you'll see as part of, um, the charter schools,
there is an intervention framework.
And the intervention framework can, um, be vary from, um,
a, a graduated one where actually you receive a,
a letter phone call and monitoring, uh, and,
and more serious, which would take a lot of, um, working
through is where if, um, outcomes are continually not,
are not improved, then there will be discussion
around termination of the contract.
Do you have anything to add?
Um, so failure to meet the,
the performance moving towards the target is,
is all New Zealand schools aims
and everyone's on a trajectory to do
that, or charter schools.
The, the minimum performance threshold is, is the measure
that they are held to account for as they continue to reach,
move to reach the target.
Um, an intervention doesn't necessarily mean a school is
closed and children have to leave.
There's other stages that can be put in place.
Thank you. Um, so how many teachers, um,
at the charter schools are currently on a, uh,
limited authority to teach?
I don't have that information to him,
but I can get that to you. Yeah, thank you.
Um, we don't necessarily keep information about
individual school staff.
We verify
that they're meeting their standard minimum compliance,
which is that 75% of their teachers are fully registered
and that the remaining 25 do have
limited authorities to teach.
So as long as they are within that, um,
those boundaries, then we don't keep information
for individual school staffing.
So there's no point for in us for putting that
as a follow up question
'cause you don't have the information
Potentially we Can collect that information. Yeah,
But you, okay. So
we'll put it as a, as a
question if you're able to get the data. Yeah.
I'd also be interested in
how many charter schools have employed people on
that limited authority to teach for more than six months.
Yep. Is that something we would be able to hear?
That's something that we could look at. Thank you.
Have questions? Not on that line.
Florence. Thank you chair.
Um, I wanna just check in terms of, uh,
let's look at in terms of the budget allocations
for charter schools from 2024 to 25.
So within the 2024 budget, which is what we're reviewing,
$21.482 million was given.
Within that, the department expenditure was $6.8 million.
So that leaves $14.6 million based on
what we saw with budget.
2025, that entirety amount has been spent.
That is $68,000 per student.
If you remove based on the fact sheet
that is on the charter school agency website
for the establishment cost, depending on the size
for new small schools, converting schools, schools,
et cetera, roughly you're looking at the proportion
of establishment cost being 24.4%.
So with that, then you are left with still
a significant portion of that.
Now, noting that when we are looking at student role,
we have to take the student role
as at the end of the budget year.
Therefore we cannot include the latest student role based on
this budget year, including the eighth new school.
So that leaves roughly 331 students as of the end
of budget 2024.
If you do the calculation
with the non-departmental expenditure
minus the establishment cost, that works out
to be about three, $3,000 per student,
which is roughly three times what state
and state integrated schools are given.
Would that number be correct?
Hold on, can we just pause?
That's not a question for the agency.
The agency's budget is 6.8 million.
So you can ask questions in relation
to the agency's budget, but not the wider policy.
I think I can, Well, I,
the chair I'm saying you can't, so
I'll let you two work that out. Yeah,
We can ask questions related to the agency's budget.
This is scrutiny of the agency of the budget,
not of the agency,
Including the non department expenditure.
Lawrence, the agency's budget is $6.8 million.
You can ask questions about that number.
Not wider than that. Okay. You got it.
If you've got a question on that, I'll give it to you.
Otherwise I'm gonna someone else for the, for the question.
Can I check then, has the agency and
or what has been budgeted for in 20 20, 24
for charter schools?
Has that all been spent?
No, I think the amount that you, um,
you referenced there was in the estimates
and so that's, that's correct.
We were allocated 6.829 million in the
24 25 financial year.
That was a revised estimate down from the original
12.8 million that was drawn down as part of the budget 24,
um, contingency.
Um, what we spent of that in 24 25
for the department was 5.917 million.
So, but the end, just checking that drawn down
and that wasn't picked up on in budget
2025 when you're looking at the previous years
review, how come?
Um, I think this is the first annual review
that we've been subject to.
Correct? Um, so this is, yeah, so that's,
I understand that yeah, that's The,
that's the year end position for, for the actuals.
What happened through that process is we handed back, um,
4 million of that
for reprioritization within the education sector.
Um, we also, um, reprioritized 2 million of that also for,
um, charter school funding as well. Yes.
So, sorry, could you just repeat the number of,
what was the, the exact expenditure
for the charter school agency
and for the department? The, the departmental
Expenditure? Yeah. 5.917,
um, million actual expenditure
for the 24 25 actual year.
And what was allocated was 6.829. Right.
That was the revised allocation after with nine
Original funding $13,000 returns to
Crown. So there's, there was about
12 point,
12.8 million originally allocated
and we reprioritized about half of that, uh, to hand back
to other, other services.
So can I just check a clarification from you chair? Yeah.
If we can't ask about non-departmental expenditure
and performance, then we can't ask
any of the previous questions.
We ask about what they're doing in terms
of whether the schools are attending,
what the schools are achieving.
Because if the, the reason students are achieving is
because students are getting three times what the state
and state integrated is getting, I think
that's an important thing for us to know that
with more funding per student students do better.
We can keep your policy questions
for when the minister comes in.
I've been very liberal with what I've allowed, um, us
to ask in the first half an hour.
I would like us to focus on the agency's review.
This is our opportunity to review the performance
of the agency in doing its job.
So let's focus on that.
Okay. Can I just clarify the, the return of money
to the center, if you like, was
around us finding efficiencies, um, in the way
that we established and set up.
We also, uh, reprioritized money to ensure
that we could open more schools
and meet the demand with that rep prioritization.
Do you have anything else to add to that?
That that's, that's correct.
I think we focused on things like contract negotiation being
in house rather than outsourced
and looking for those efficiency opportunities
that were available to us.
And, um, leading on our colleagues within the education
sector like the Ministry
of Education who's helped quite a lot with the setup
of this and the implementation.
Jeff, um, I'm a little bit confused.
Uh, because the government has allocated
$153 million in budget 2024
to establish the 15 new charter schools that you convert
around 35 charter schools.
Are you saying outside
of the six plus million for the department?
We can't ask questions about any of that other a hundred,
153 million.
It's in the report. That's
what the government's allocated to, um, charter schools
And they're the agency responsible to
achieve the government's policy objective, which is
to establish approximately 15 new charter schools
and convert 35. So you,
You pay that money out or is that managed by Yes, we
They do. Yes, we
are responsible for
Administering that appropriation,
which includes the non-departmental funding.
Okay. So that means, Yeah. Okay.
We'll have a have another guy asking the questions.
So might go back to um, Lawrence's questions Yeah.
On that. Mm-hmm. And then I can sub off that one.
So if the, the question's about the management
of the money comfortable, if we're getting into the politics
of good or bad spend, that's where I'm gonna rule
Them out. Well we, this
is all about, this is not
About good or bad spend,
but this is about how much is being spent.
Right. I have neither
Fee About whether the spend was good.
Yeah. So could you just, um, ask that question again?
'cause there have a few figures you
quoted where you were after,
Uh, application For non departmental.
Basically, um, if we're looking at the student role,
so we're looking at per student.
Mm-hmm. And that's how OPS funding for state
and state integrators who works
and we scrutinized ministry of education.
But like what was just said, you're responsible
for the budget for charter schools.
So there were in 2040 2024 to 25,
there were $14.6 million allocated
to non-departmental expenditure.
And that's specifically for the establishment plus
operations of charter schools.
Within that, we can only look for
that one particular year in terms of the role.
And the latest role I have for the end of
that financial year is seven charter schools with a row
of roughly 331
because the eighth school
that was established in July is featured in 2025 budget.
So within that seven schools role,
$14.6 million was spent.
I understand there's the establishment cost,
'cause all of them were new, none
of them were converting based on charter school agency's own
website for proportionality of establishment schools.
You're looking at 20.4%
of the funding towards the school goes
into its establishment.
So if you remove that amount from the equation,
then the rest is left to what is comparable
to the ops funding for state or state integrated schools.
And the number I have for that is $30,000 per student.
Is that number correct?
What number do you have in terms of the per student funding?
We, um, we don't calculate that in terms
of per student funding.
Um, what I can, what I can um, let you know is
that from the, um, budget allocation in the non-departmental
for paying schools
and sponsors, that there was 10.915 million, um, paid
in actual payments made to sponsors
for the 24 25 financial year.
Um, and that reflected, um, a breakdown of, um,
6.348 million in one-off establishment funding,
Sorry, 10.9.
So the total, um, funding allocated
to schools 10.915 million for the financial year.
That included 6.348 million in
one-off establishment funding.
So I think that's the amount you are seeking to put aside
for your calculation.
So, and 4.567 million in operational entitlement funding.
And that, that largely relates to, um, the, the, the role,
um, that's used.
Um, it's not accurate to divide that by the number
of students currently in the school
because large um, significant portion
of year one funding is based on an establishment role.
And the establishment role is a realistic evidence-based
forecast of what it's likely to be in term
five of their operation.
So it's, yeah, there's a,
there's some complexities obviously to the funding formula,
but we, we are not involved in negotiating what is paid.
We are just involved in applying that formula
and we can give you that information. If
You could provide the formula, that would be helpful.
Um, can I just check 6.348 for establishment
and 4.6657,
Sorry, it's 4.567 million.
I'm sorry. Entitlement funding.
Can I just have one more sub on this?
So 'cause 6.348 million for establishment cost,
that's quite a lot compared to
what you have on your website in terms of fact sheet
for the proportion for establishment cost.
Has, have you been using the, like how is that
so different from what is there?
Because if you're looking at a small new composite
or a small new secondary, let's say small new secondary
or composite, um, which is what most of the schools are,
and I'm guessing 36 row, um,
that's primary plus secondary exception cost I'm guessing
over here is uh, it's 169,928.
Um, that's for a row of 36.
How did you manage to spend $6.8 million on
establishment for seven schools? Yeah.
Establishment, it's not done on a ratio basis in terms
of 60 40 or anything like that.
So that the amount that was paid out would've been
for some schools that were operating
and also some schools that were not yet operating
and contracted to open in a future date.
Would you be able For clarification question there?
Yeah. Who sets that? Um, equation
That's set through policy.
Okay. Um, that, so these are policy decisions that
of the went through the ministry to the minister?
Yeah, correct. And we apply those through the,
through the contract, which
Was part of what I was saying about maybe some
of these questions for the ministry
and for the minister as opposed to the agency. Yeah,
We don't need to draw into that.
I think if you're able to provide that's very helpful.
But I guess the question I have now chair is
for seven schools and some of them are already operating
to spend nearly $7 million on establishment.
That's, and not,
because I'm guessing when you say establishment,
you mean both CapEx and op-eds?
Yeah, I mean they use the funding for a variety
of it's opera operations.
They don't get, but they use it for a variety of things
for everyone spiting out the school, um,
investing in their initial IT furniture
and equipment staffing, property related costs.
So typically what establishment funding is, would
You be able to, without giving out the names
of the schools, which I'm less interested in a breakdown of
how much was given per school
because again, you know, that's $1 million per school.
Right?
Um, what we'll do, we'll put a request
for some consideration you can make offline around
what you can and can't provide. Yeah.
Yes. It'll depend on how it's, I expect some of those we,
We'll keep the, the questions on the formulas
for the appropriate ministry and minister.
Um, myself
before I go to PJI on this is, I was
Just going to, um, just say this about the cost thing.
I think if you're just looking at one figure,
we might think it's quite big,
but we, uh, what are we comparing it with
and what does that involve? So Yeah.
Which was actually My question is the, this is,
Yeah, for your external consideration if you,
Yeah. Right. Let's bring
this back together.
One, um, one speaker at a time.
My question is,
do you have any comparison when you are setting, um, this up
or, I understand you made the comment
that you don't manage the contracting,
but do you see any comparison for
what the amount would be spent on the establishment of a,
um, government school?
Yeah, we do have some, um, some indication of that.
It's not, it's not a consideration in terms
of applying the charter school funding model,
but it's, um, if you were to say, look at, um,
the second year of a charter school's operation,
that's probably much more likely to be a equivalent, um,
figure to what a state school is is receiving.
We do know that state schools are eligible for, um, a
fixed funding component as, as part of their base funding
and sometimes some funding for up
to three years to get going.
Whereas charter schools have had, uh, far less than that to,
to, to start up.
Some of the state schools actually receive, um,
senior staffing, um, salaries for, for a whole year
before students arrive.
So those, those equivalents are there.
Um, and we know, uh, we know
that these are comparable figures.
When you, when you take the per student amounts, uh,
they're actually derived from the same figures
and it, um, criteria
that state school funding is, um, provided.
So the equity index and the role size
and a range of other factors determine that there's no one
amount that's allocated per student.
Uh, but those same factors are published
on our website enterprise.
So instead of comparing this number to
the average student cost in state school,
the appropriate comparison if it was to be done by members,
would be to an establishment cost and a state school.
Yes. A new state school, which is
Established. Yeah. So
I mean, if it's helpful,
we can provide some of those good examples.
You can provide some of the
examples and calculations would be
Helpful. I think what we
need to reiterate here is that, um,
our charter schools are mostly funded on, um,
per student basis, and
that the funding is broadly equivalent to, um, state schools
with similar roles and characteristics.
I think that is, um,
what we should have probably said from the beginning
Point well made. Um,
can we move on to another topic? New question?
Um, yep. Far away.
Lauren. Um, just very quickly, um,
this is quite a short question.
Can I just ask how many charter schools are currently
accepting international students?
I don't have it. Um, no, not at
The moment. Thank
you.
Sorry. But Do you want that
Recorded? Can I just, can
I just reiterate that there aren't any, um,
receiving, but there have been, uh, schools
that have applied to receive international students
to the Ministry of Education.
How many would you know out of that?
I, I'm not, I don't have the answer off the top of my head.
We, I do know that that's the case. Thank you. Yeah. Okay.
Um, I just have a question around, um,
managing conflicts of interest.
Um, I just want to know what your role is.
Um, I don't know how that can be extended
to the authorization board's role,
but the management of the conflicts of interest,
if I come back to the strategic plan,
which is supporting effective and robust, um, authorization.
So in relation to conflict of interest,
our authorization board who made the decision, uh, um,
declare their conflicts of interests at each board member,
each board meeting, uh,
and they, there are some practices
that the authorization board take around that,
whether a board member, uh, removes themself from,
from being part of the decision making process to respond.
So we do have, um, processes for identifying conflicts
of interest, mitigating
and managing conflicts of, um, interest.
Does the agency play the board secretariat role? Correct.
Yeah. So you have oversight, um, of that, like they don't
manage themselves and are only accountable to themselves?
No, no. They, we, we provide the secretariat
and we ask at every meeting
whether there are any new conflicts of interests that,
that they need to declare all.
Um, it's a different question. Do that one. Thank you.
So just looking at questions, uh, great.
The other responses to written questions on page 23, uh,
question number 21 was around, um, complaints.
And I just found, um, it was sending us to go
and do all of the homework ourselves.
Uh, I am interested to know if the organization, um,
has received complaints
or if you're aware of complaints about, um,
the organization extending
to the authorization board and charter schools.
What, what does that landscape look like?
So we have had, um, as you'll know, that there is high,
high interest in, um, charter schools, uh,
and that we've had 78 applications for the new, new schools.
If you do the math, that doesn't divide into 15 very well.
Uh, and there have been some disappointed, some, uh,
potential sponsors that have been disappointed
and that they have, um, raised, raised the
process, uh, as a result.
And we have, um, we have, um, responded to the fact
that when, when we are making those applications
that audit New Zealand is sitting in the room watching us,
um, process those applications.
Uh, and then just, um, in terms of, oh,
anybody got a stuff on that one?
Yeah. Uh, on page 33, um, this is around procurement,
so I could have brought it up, um, earlier,
but I was just, uh, concerned
to see the comment there on page 33, um, this is about
how many contracts are valued at over a million dollars
that were awarded in 24 25.
Um, and we aren't
provided with any details in the
list of schools that are there.
And the comment that the total contract value over the term
of the 10, 10 year contract cannot be reported
as it is not currently known.
And yet we are hearing the possibility now of
that being extended out to 20 year contracts without
knowing the value of those.
So once, once the school has the establishment funding
after their first year, uh, it is the then moves
to role-based, um, funding
and the students that are actually sitting in the,
in the seats at the time.
So it is very hard for us to, to, to forecast that
and calculate, calculate that.
So, um, there is shifting in relation to funding
and what the schools will receive as a result of what, uh,
their roles and,
and that continues to change throughout the 10 year period,
potentially throughout a 20 year period.
Like do we, how do we know what,
how much we're signing up for?
Well, don't,
Well, that's part of growing the charter school network
and, and ensuring that, uh, you, you are paid
for the students that are there and sitting in the seats.
So it moves to actual funding as opposed to, um,
notional fund notion.
Similarly Demand potentially lock driven 10
and then another 10 based on a starting number,
and then increase that
and get that amount of money per student.
Like it's based on the actual number
of students that enroll.
So after the first year of establishment,
and that, that is comparable with
what happens in new schools
and state systems that they get a, an establishment, uh,
get establishment funding once that, um,
our establishment funding is for one year, and then
after that it moves to actuals.
And how many students that you have currently enrolled?
Enrolled is what you receive funding on?
They're getting at 10 and 10, so
Supplementary from, from me, which might help clarify.
So, so, so I'm understanding this correctly.
They get an establishment amount in year one. Yes.
Which is based on a projected establishment number,
which has been verified through a process,
and then they get a per student amount
for the 10 plus potentially 10 years as, um,
Willow Jim Prime referred to.
But ultimately that could end up being zero if they're not a
good school and no one wants to go there.
Correct. Or could be significant within some cap, I imagine,
for what their enrollment
Cap is. Does that That's
Right. That's, that's exactly
right.
So if their role goes down, they'll get less funding.
If the role goes up, they'll get more and their contract
and set some, some, um,
physical constraint capacities perhaps in a property
or those other sorts of matters that retrain the number
that they can hold.
Great. Thank you for that clarity,
Lawrence. Um,
I'm interested to know,
because the idea is that then unlike state
of state Itegrated school, a lot of that is zoned, you know,
they get the number of students
and then they get funded proportionately to
that charter schools, sort of you
what you're saying is operating in a similar way
where their funding is dependent on role,
but the difference being there's no zones
for charter schools, they have to find the students.
So I guess the difference there being
that charter school there
and functions in some ways, like private schools
where they have to do active recruitment
and advertisement to try
and get students to go to other schools.
How do you have any information about
how charter schools are then using that funding to recruit
for more students, which again,
state schools in general doesn't need to do?
Our, our job is to ensure that they have the funding
to provide outcomes in relation
to student achievement and progress.
Uh, uh, very similar to other schools.
They will, um, they will advertise,
but for students, um, it's very clear
that in the charter school network there, um, that when a
parent wishes to roll a child in a charter school, uh,
there is no enrollment scheme that they have to be accepted,
um, where there's designated character, then they have to,
um, sign up to the COPA and, and vision
and values of that particular school.
So in, in relation to your question, um,
the, the idea and I ideology that sits
behind charter schools is to grow the network
and to provide choice
and, um, for, for parents,
therefore there is no zoning as a result of that,
their job is to deliver against the contracts, um,
that they've signed up around achievements, attendance,
and providing a, a safe environment for learners.
I think that's part of the model as well as
that the funding's kind of given to them
as bulk, bulk funding.
So if they wanna spend more
or less of that on various components
and ramp up their advertising that is available to them,
but we hold them to the,
or the board will hold them to account contracted outcomes.
What question, uh, I'm just really interested actually.
Um, this wasn't my original supplementary,
but, um, so in terms of signing up to, um,
the kopa of that particular school, are any
of them teaching the knowledge rich curricular?
Uh, that's the school decides on its curriculum.
Um, and what we contact
for is outcomes in relation to student achievement.
So we have a, a number of schools that, um, are providing,
um, curriculum that is not NCC.
We have some that are undertaking, uh, baccalaureate,
we have some undertaking Cambridge.
Uh, and their commitment is that they, um, they increase
and improve outcomes for learners.
Mm. I just thinking about that, I mean,
it's quite interesting because that's really the localizing
and tailoring of the curriculum to suit their students' need
and get in the state schools.
They moving to the prescribed knowledge rich.
I wonder if that might then create more desire
for charter schools.
I'll leave that there. My question,
I can't possibly respond to that.
Um, I just am really interested in the reporting, um,
around if a charter school doesn't achieve the performance
targets that have been set.
I think you talked about how the performance targets were
set before and then
what the intervention plan was if
they weren't achieving those.
But what, um, can we expect, um, in terms
of accountability around the reporting, uh, if the targets
for their performance are not being, uh, met?
So I, I think, um, we have quite a,
a robust performance framework, um,
where they are reporting twice, um,
twice yearly in relation to their, um, outcomes.
We also have part of their intervention, um, um, as well,
I mean I think I can, Julie is our performance monitor.
Yeah. So they're reporting, uh, at twice yearly
and then public publicly published their, uh,
annual report in May.
So charter school's performance against their
contracted outcomes are made public.
So that'll be May next year. Yes,
Yes. Yeah. And
we don't have any idea what those
will look like, um,
because if we will notice,
we don't know what's been negotiated in
the contracts and so on.
Yeah. So the contract's pretty clear about, um,
reporting attendance, reporting achievement, um,
and reporting outcomes against.
Um, that's pretty much, um, the framework of the contract is
that you will improve student achievement
and progress, uh,
financial performance in financial performance.
If you don't, um, there are some,
there are some interventions.
I mean, I think the most challenging intervention is
that you could be, you could have your contract terminated
as a result of not, um, performing
Final questions. Yeah.
Um, I'm just interested around,
Uh, compliance.
So I'm looking at, for example,
when you're looking at the standard minimum compliance, uh,
on page 24 of your report, um,
does the pre establishment checks.
Um, so that's good to see three came back noncompliant,
but you said it addressed promptly.
Uh, and they're all reasonably minor, so that's fine.
When it comes to, for example, so you know,
when you're looking at PTEs, um, for, you know,
you NZ QA is quite stringent.
You, we used to have not anymore,
but externally evaluation review would have no choice.
And you get an independent body going in there, review it
based on the report that you are mentioning
that's being produced next year in May,
who does the external review?
Or is it all self reviewed?
Uh, so Is it ERO
E eero undertakes a visit
after the first year of establishment,
And then, and Then they will go onto regular
cycle, which Okay.
Um, having previously both worked there, it was three years,
however, um, that will be for Eero to decide.
Okay. But, um, they will be part of the review, um, work
of eero going forward.
And would that also, as you said, like the annual report,
which is publicly available,
the Eero report also presumably?
Yes. Yes. When they do. Okay. That's good to know.
Thank you. Great. Yep.
Do you have, yeah. Yep. Okay.
Um, I have, just moving onto I guess a
different, a different topic.
The idea of charter school obviously is a new,
it's been brought back.
So we're looking at sort of some of the things
that was happening in the last
charter school and also this one.
And I'm just curious on one particular thing, which is
in 2010 to 2017, the criteria
of establishing a partnership school, a charter school,
prioritize areas and communities
of the greater socioeconomic disadvantage.
Do you know why this is no longer the case
with the current Chinese school scheme?
That was part of the policy setting to ensure
that all parents across the network have choice in
what they would wanted their children
or students to, to have access to.
And it was about growing, uh, a network where
that could support innovation, um,
across the system.
Okay. So if that was the case,
it's no longer in there then how, then do you
see the potential concern
that then why don't put them open up more charter schools in
specific areas, like what you're seeing with ECE that
maximizes their ability to recruit students,
particularly in the well of areas?
So, I mean, for example,
we're seeing multiple charter schools being
opened in the Auckland Central and Epsom area,
because that's also where it is the most affluent.
I think that we, you look across the eight schools
that we have, they've been set, um, they've been developed,
uh, well established in, in a range of areas.
We've got, uh, one in Northland who is, um, specifically
around, um, Kopa and Maori.
We have one in Christchurch that is particularly looking at
students that haven't attended the school up to,
to four years of, of their schooling.
So there is, um, a range.
We have a school where there are students accessing, uh,
curriculum through, through the arts, um, who have,
who have students that, who have also not attended.
So what we are seeing, um, from our data
that we are getting a range of families
and students wanting to enroll in charter schools.
Great. Final question.
Great. Thank you. I'm just, um, just trying
to figure out what steps, um, the agencies taking
and the board, when we look at, um, N-Z-P-A-A, for example,
um, where the minister made the comment,
the school will serve students
with serious sporting aspirations, giving them the skills
to ignite a professional career.
Um, how does that align with the statutory requirement
for charter schools to enroll
or students apply who apply irrespective of the
sporting performance level?
Um, what I can say is that
that particular sponsor is fully aware that it, um,
if students wish to enroll, then they have
to consider the enrollment.
Um, and they were considerate.
They don't, I, I'm, as I've said,
a charter school cannot turn down enrollment.
They have to enroll all students, um, if they align to the,
the character of the school.
And then we have charter schools that are not special
character where they must enroll.
And, um, charter school agency monitors that very carefully,
whether students are, are not being enrolled
for any reason whatsoever.
Okay. Good.
Thank you, um, so much
for the time you've given us this evening, the extra hour,
um, at the end of the job that you've done.
We appreciate the work that you've done
and, uh, hopefully it wasn't too much of a, um, challenging
to, to journey.
You've had the charter school agency. Thank you very much.
Final, Remember for.